<div class="delete">

<div class="calibre1">
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.2.1 Key developments at the World Bank</h3>
<div class="item">
          Clinton-appointed President <a class="item2"></a>James Wolfensohn oversaw the World Bank’s transition to the
          post-Washington Consensus and expanded the <a class="item2"></a>poverty-reduction mission (see <a class="item2">Table 4.2</a>). Under Wolfensohn, the phrase ‘Our dream is a world free of poverty’ was grandiosely
          carved into the entrance of the Bank’s refurbished headquarters in 1996 (Marshall 2008, 54). The Bank
          retained poverty reduction as its overarching mission since, even during the presidencies of conservative US
          Republican Party appointees Paul Wolfowitz and Robert Zoellick. Still, as Cammack (2004, 197) argued,
          Wolfensohn’s Bank promoted the ‘sustainable reproduction of capitalism’ by ensuring micro-level incentive
          structures were in line with neoliberal macroeconomic ones. Wolfensohn further attempted to maintain the
          Bank’s hegemony by shaping developmental thought through programmes like the Knowledge Bank initiative in
          1996, designed to make the Bank the leading provider of development expertise, and the <a class="item2"></a>World Bank ‘Doing Business’ series starting in 2004, which reported on the ease of doing business
          in states across the globe and has been very influential (Banerjee et al. 2006). He also renamed structural
          adjustment loans as development policy loans in 2004 to distance the Bank from the most ideological aspects
          of the Washington Consensus (Bazbauers 2018). The Bank also helped launch the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
          (<a class="item2"></a>HIPC) initiative for debt relief in 1996, although debts to the Bank were exempt until
          the 2005 <a class="item2"></a>Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, to protect its preferred creditor status
          and credit rating. Despite progress, the conditions on debt relief advocated neoliberal prescriptions like
          limiting public expenditure and prioritising debt servicing over other needs.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          World Bank lending spiked in 1998 and 1999 in response to the Asian Financial Crisis from an annual average
          of $22.03 billion in 1990–5 to $27.8 billion but rapidly declined to $15.3 billion in 2000. Yet, MDBs need to
          lend, so they steadily grew again to reach $24.7 billion in 2008, with the GFC then causing a further spike
          in loans. The relative stability of the 1999–2007 interregnum was not great for the IMF or Bank as their
          customers were reducing debt or able to borrow with few conditions and at competitive rates from other
          provides. Indeed, many countries were building foreign reserves explicitly to avoid having to turn to the IMF
          in the future. Still, the Bank remained vitally important to many smaller and poorer countries whose access
          to private finance was limited.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Co-financing expanded World Bank lending. This was mostly with official bilateral and multilateral partners.
          Between <a class="item2"></a>1996 and 1999, co-financing ranged between 33.9% and 40.1% of the value of bank
          loans. As Bracking (2009) argued, these linkages highlight that there is not just an MDB system, but rather a
          system of interlinked development finance institutions. Still, an indication that MDF and the MDBs declined
          in influence over the 2000s was that by 2007 Bank co-financing was equal to just 25.5% of operations. Bank
          lending to the financial sector increased during this period through all three of its lending arms,
          particularly the IFC. Leading up to the GFC, the Bank was quite exposed to asset- and mortgage-backed
          securities, though the IADB was far more exposed (Kellerman 2019).
        </div>
<table class="item8" width="98%">
<caption class="item9">
<a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 4.2</em> World Bank Presidents 1995–2007</a>
</caption>
<thead class="item10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<th class="item11">Name and term</th>
<th class="item11">Background</th>
<th class="item11">Legacy</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="calibre10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">James Wolfensohn 1995–2005</td>
<td class="item12">Born in Australia, acquired US citizenship specifically to gain the World Bank
              presidency, attended University of Sydney and Harvard Business School, investment banker with interest in
              arts and music, known as the ‘Renaissance Banker.’</td>
<td class="item12">Launched the HIPC in 1996 along with the IMF Managing Director. He focused on
              corruption before the Asian Financial Crisis and more so after with institutional mechanisms established
              in 1999. This crisis highlighted the Bank’s lack of inclusion, participation, and the shallow nature of
              its poverty reduction agenda, and they became key parts of the post-Washington Consensus along with
              influences from NIE. The 1997 Strategic Compact reform was designed to gain more resources for Bank in
              return for a streamlined institution. Launched the Comprehensive Development Framework and PRSPs in 1999
              as frameworks for country lending and later as mechanisms for implementing the MDGs.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Paul Wolfowtiz 2005–7</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended Cornell University, obtained PhD from University of Chicago, held
              a number of government appointments for Republican administrations.</td>
<td class="item12">Wolfowitz was a political appointee from the Bush administration, which did not
              support the Bank. Had a tumultuous relationship with the Bank Board. Focused on anti-corruption but
              forced to resign after giving his partner a position with a high salary.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<div class="source">
          Source: Compiled by authors from a range of sources, basic details from World Bank website (2019).
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.2.2 Key developments in other MDBs</h3>
<div class="item">
          The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> took an active response to the <a class="item2"></a>Asian Financial Crisis, but some of
          its IMF-style policies led to backlash. It adopted poverty reduction as its mission in 1999, predating the
          World Bank. It was partly the result of pressure from the US Treasury, which forced the Asian MDB to put a
          much greater share of its funds into social and environmental projects than it had in the past (Babb 2009).
          The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and most of the RDBs adopted and expanded safeguard mechanisms to protect project
          affected people from harm, which has helped ensure loans benefit local communities, though many problem
          projects are still funded. The RDBs increased inter-agency harmonisation too and engaged with new financial
          instruments following the World Bank’s lead.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The post-Washington Consensus era was a solid period for many of the sub-regional and specialised development
          banks. The smaller MDBs that would become influential during the 2010s began their expansion circa 2000, the
          <abbr>CDB</abbr> and <abbr>CAF</abbr> being two examples of this change in fortune, following organisational
          restructurings implemented during the 1990s. The focus on the private sector expanded in many smaller MDBs,
          for example, the <abbr>AFESD</abbr>’s Board of Governors approved a revision of the MDB’s Articles of
          Agreement in 1997 to better support the Arab private sector (<abbr>AFESD</abbr> 1997).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In Europe, the <abbr>CEB</abbr> broadened its mandate during the post-Washington Consensus era, through the
          1997 <a class="item2"></a>Strasbourg Summit that advocated the <abbr>CEB</abbr> incorporate ‘strengthening
          European social cohesion’ into its mandate and the 2005 Warsaw Summit that called for building a free,
          democratic, and more inclusive European society; such changes reflected the greater focus on good governance
          in the post-Washington Consensus period. The EIB became the EIB Group during this period with the
          incorporation of sibling institutions addressing private sector financing and partnerships, reflecting the
          expansion of the World Bank into the World Bank Group with the IFC and MIGA.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In Africa, the misfortunes of the <abbr>EADB</abbr> continued into the 2000s, not as the result of the
          economic decline of its members but due to severe mismanagement of finances, leading to several high-ranking
          officials, including Director General Godfrey Tumusiime, being expelled; it posted losses of millions of
          dollars. In contrast, <abbr>BOAD</abbr> increased its private sector financing, along with a few other
          smaller MDBs. <abbr>BOAD</abbr> originally lent to regional member states but, from 2002, it provided loans
          to the private sector for development projects of regional significance plus lines of credit to small and
          medium private enterprises. This can be interpreted as the MDBs following the lead of the World Bank towards
          more private sector financing products in line with the post-Washington Consensus approach of market-led
          development.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.2.3 New MDBs</h3>
<div class="item">
          Just two new MDBs were established between 1998 and 2009 and there was one unsuccessful proposal. The first
          new MDB, a trade and development bank, was established in 1996 by the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO)
          regional grouping comprised of mainly central Asian states. The ECO Trade and Development Bank (ETDB) was
          founded by three of the ECO states – Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey with Azerbaijan, Afghanistan, and the Kyrgyz
          Republic joining later. The <a class="item2"></a>ETDB aims simply to expand intra-regional trade and increase
          economic development. The second new MDB, the Eurasian Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a>EDB), was
          created in 2006 as another post-communist MDB mandated to develop and strengthen market economies, although
          its member states – the Russian Federation, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Armenia, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan – remain
          far from model market economies.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The unsuccessful proposal was for a <a class="item2"></a><em class="calibre4">Banco del Sur</em> (or Bank of the South), the
          idea for which was first raised in 2005 between Venezuela and Brazil. It was an expression of
          Neostructuralism and an indicator of new activism in the Global South. Its proposers were concerned that the
          South was still depositing large amounts of resources in Global North financial institutions and they wanted
          to create a new regional financial architecture (Pérez 2009–10, Rosales 2013). Discussions occurred in 2006–7
          between Venezuela and Argentina, and they were joined by Brazil and Ecuador. In 2009, an agreement to
          establish the MDB was signed with eight initial members. In responding to the demands of the different
          founding member countries, the functions proposed for the MDB were:
        </div>
<blockquote class="item13">
<div class="quote">
            to finance development projects in key sectors of the economy, aimed at improving competitiveness,
            scientific-technological development, infrastructure, creation and provision of services, intraregional
            productive complementarity, and the maximization of value added to raw materials produced in the countries
            of the region.
          </div>
<footer class="item14">
            (cited in Rosales 2013, 31)
          </footer>
</blockquote>
<div class="item">
          Its proposed structure seems rather like a standard MDB: a proposed initial capitalisation of $20 billion,
          capital raised on bond markets, and weighted voting for large projects and structures matters but one
          country, one vote for simple operational matters. Its constituent agreement entered into force in 2011 but
          adequate capital was not paid-in to make it operational. Venezuelan President <a class="item2"></a>Nicolás
          Maduro attempted to revise it in April 2015, but it was not capitalised (Mares and Trinkunas 2016). The
          proposed <em class="calibre4">Banco del Sur</em> was a clear manifestation of Latin American Neostructuralism, and thus part
          of the broader post-Washington Consensus discourse. It also reopened discussion about the need for public
          development financing, which the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr> continued in the 2010s.
        </div>
</section>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">4.3 Retroliberalism and the rise of debt: <a class="item6"></a>2010–20</h2>
<div class="item">
        The progressive changes of the post-Washington Consensus era had come and largely gone by the early 2010s, with
        the focus turning to the retroliberal – or beyond aid – agenda. The quantity of resources delivered as opposed
        to the quality of aid effectiveness came to define MDB cooperation documents. The retroliberal agenda first
        emerged in the early 2000s and began as a slow political reconfiguration away from grant aid. As early as 2002,
        the <a class="item2"></a>International Conference on the Financing of Development in Monterrey made it clear
        that poor countries were responsible for their own development and that the private sector was expected to be
        the key course of finance going forward (Saith 2006). And, yet the retroliberal era did not fully emerge until
        around 2010, catalysed by the upheaval of the GFC.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Ideationally, it was hoped that the 2007–8 GFC would contribute to a broadening of development discourse. And,
        for a moment in the wake of the crisis, there was a brief flirtation with unorthodox policies, in particular
        Keynesian stimulus spending and financial controls in order to bail out capitalists but this was followed by a
        rapid return to austerity politics (Ortiz et al. 2020). The minor changes to regulations such as reforms to the
        Basel banking rules did not address the systemic risk that had been created by the liberalisation of financial
        flows, and financialisation revived after the crisis (Gabor 2020, Goldin et al. 2014). Mainstream donors and
        the MDBs maintained a broadly post-Washington Consensus mindset, but now with an increase emphasis on
        infrastructure, nationalism, and financialisation – promoting private investment and loans over grant aid.
        Thus, following Murray and Overton (2016), we label the period from 2010 to 2020 as the retroliberal era.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The term retroliberalism underscores that the policy response to the GFC benefited capital by socialising its
        losses and leaving labour income to pay for this through public debt. The practice of neoliberalism has always
        differed from the theory, with centre left and right governments adapting to serve business interests. In the
        current era, this means a return to a more state-centric and nationalist discourse focussing on the benefits
        that development aid and finance can provide to private and state firms rather than to poverty reduction.
        Retroliberalism has also marginalised the SDGs; they may get lip service, but they are no longer at the centre
        of development thinking. Significantly, the dramatic rise of China and its development strategy has put
        infrastructure again at the centre of development finance, a resurgence that broadly aligns with the
        modernisation mentality the World Bank pursued over its first two decades.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        China’s approach to rapid industrialisation differs radically from the minimalist state agenda of the
        Washington Consensus and China’s influence on development has grown – by 2019, they were the third largest
        World Bank shareholder and were central to the formation of the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>. This has led
        scholars like Jakupec and Kelly (2019) and Lin and Wang (2017) to argue that China has created space for the
        Global South to adopt developmentalist approaches. However, like Yağcı (2016, 43), we argue that while China’s
        experience may be informative for debates about developmentalism, China itself is not concerned with ‘enlarging
        space for developing countries’ trade relations and industrialisation efforts.’ Rather, the contemporary
        inegalitarian capital order provides the foundations for <a class="item2"></a>China’s development, which they
        support along with the associated global economic governance system (Bond 2015, Robinson 2015).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The expansion of China’s mutual aid activities since 2008, notably the Belt and Road Initiative of <a class="item2"></a>2013, was largely in response to domestic stagnation. Its aid promotes retroliberal policies –
        supporting open markets and broadly neoliberal fiscal and monetary policy, but with increased investment in
        infrastructure and less interference in state affairs including around human rights. Further, China’s policies
        support their investors, whether they are seeking to source raw materials, outsource elements of low-wage
        manufacturing, or gain construction contracts outside China using Chinese inputs and labour. Indeed, it is not
        unwarranted to say that they are often ‘kicking away the ladder for developing countries’ (Chang 2002). A key
        issue here is China’s extensive use of debt instruments, which previously had been very cautious about. During
        the 2010s, however, China’s approach became a retroliberal one – largely neoliberal policies with a good dash
        of infrastructure spending, all wrapped up in debt.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        China’s expansion of debt relations has led the MDBs to expand their loan portfolios and the Global North to
        expand existing, and create new, bilateral development finance mechanisms, such as the US International
        Development Finance Corporation or Australia’s Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific. Private
        sector debt has rapidly grown too over the past decade, and in 2018 global debt reached a record high of 230%
        of GDP. Since 2010, debt in EMDEs ‘has risen 54 percentage points of GDP to a historic peak of about 170% of
        GDP in 2018’ (Kose et al. 2020, xix). China itself has also rapidly expanded debt, but they have the advantage
        of most of their being owed to domestic sources.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Key contributors to the 2010s debt wave are the usual culprits of <a class="item2"></a>low interest rates and
        financialisation, as well as ‘a rise of regional banks, growing appetite for local currency bonds, and
        increased demand for EMDE debt from the expanding non-bank financial sector’ (Kose et al. 2020, xxi). The
        expansion in EMDE debt between 2010 and 2014 was predominantly private sector debt, but from 2014 to 2018 that
        reversed with publicly guaranteed debt making up the majority. In low-income countries, both public and private
        debt has grown and there has been a shift away from concessional finance and towards private creditors,
        although smaller sub-Saharan African states are still primarily reliant on official creditors (Bonizzi,
        Laskaridis, and Toporowski 2019). According to Kose et al. (2020, 10), this ‘wave of debt buildup has been
        unprecedented in its size, speed, and reach’ in EMDEs. It is also more global than previous debt build-up waves
        occurring since the 1970s, though debt in the Global North has been stable and there have been declines in debt
        in the Middle East, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia.
      </div>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.3.1 Key developments at the World Bank</h3>
<div class="item">
          World Bank President Jim Yong Kim, who led the MDB from 2012 to 2019, with his public health background,
          seemed to offer a progressive approach to development (see <a class="item2">Table 4.3</a>). By the time Kim
          left the Bank, however, the MDB had doubled down on financialisation. At the same time, networks between the
          MDBs and <abbr>DFI</abbr>s continued to grow. The <a class="item2"></a>International Development Finance Club
          was established by the IMF and Bank in 2011 to help <abbr>DFI</abbr>s set agendas on development finance and
          share know-how. It has six SRDBs and the IsDB as members of its private sector arm, along with Global North
          and South national development banks and one Exim bank.
        </div>
<table class="item8" width="98%">
<caption class="item9">
<a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 4.3</em> World Bank Presidents 2007–20</a>
</caption>
<thead class="item10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<th class="item11">Name and term</th>
<th class="item11">Background</th>
<th class="item11">Legacy</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="calibre10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Robert B. Zoellick 2007–12</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended Swarthmore College and Harvard, spent three decades between
              private sector firms (including Goldman Sachs) and government appointments in Republican administrations,
              including Deputy Secretary of State (2005–6).</td>
<td class="item12">World Bank President during the 2007–8 GFC, when lending increased to an all-time
              high. He oversaw the first general capital increase for IBRD in 20 years agreed to in 2010. Involved in
              an increase in shares for developing and transition countries and agreed to review their position every 5
              years. Commissioned Zedillo Report released in 2009 on the World Bank Group’s governance structures.
              Zoellick’s presidency focused on good governance and anti-corruption and launched the World Bank’s ‘open
              data’ initiative.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Jim Yong Kim 2012–19</td>
<td class="item12">Born in South Korea, migrated to the US with family at age 5, attended Brown
              University, obtained MD and PhD from Harvard University, co-founded public health NGO, served as a
              director in WHO, and worked as university lecturer and administrator.</td>
<td class="item12">Kim initiated another major and controversial reorganisation, some of it reversed in
              2017. Originally focused on health and human development and approved Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen
              Engagement. Shifted to focus on financialisation through the Maximising Finance for Development
              initiative, which was linked to a large capital increase agreed to in 2018 and expanded the role of the
              IFC. This promoted privatised social services. Kim also set stronger targets for climate finance, ended
              financing for oil and gas exploration and extraction, and strengthened rules on lending to private banks
              with fossil fuel investments.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">David R. Malpass 2019–</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended Colorado College and University of Denver, Georgetown University
              economist, chief economist of Bear Stearns, held government appointments in Republican
              administrations.</td>
<td class="item12">Warned about the build-up of debt in EMDEs, including debt from IFIs. President during
              the COVID-19 pandemic, which to mid-2020 involved a $160 billion commitment, with strong emphasis on the
              IFC.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<div class="source">
          Source: Compiled by authors from a range of sources, basic details from World Bank website (2019).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          World Bank commitments reached an all-time high in 2010 of $58.7 billion, and then dropped substantially to
          $29 billion in 2012. Yet, this lending interregnum was short. As the investment climate deteriorated
          mid-decade, states increased public spending, and President Kim announced his ‘billions to trillions’ agenda
          in 2013 that aimed to leverage Bank lending to shift from billions of dollars in investments to trillions.
          Between 2017 and 2019, average annual Bank commitments were $44.8 billion and IBRD gross disbursements were
          $18.5 billion and IDA gross disbursements totalled $14.9 billion (World Bank 2019).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The ‘billions to trillions’ agenda was followed by Maximising Finance for Development (MFD) in 2017, which
          sought to leverage official development finance to attract private investment but with a focus on
          ‘innovative’ financial instruments. The World Bank’s 2018 large shareholding increase (detailed in <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a>) was core to this, though it was also likely partly driven by competition with the new
          MDBs and Chinese development finance. The increase substantially expanded Bank Group lending capacity and is
          linked to the IDA raising funds on money markets for the first time in its history. With the Trump regime in
          power in the US, it seems that the shareholder increase came at the price of Kim’s resignation.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The MFD initiatives shows that, despite the havoc wreaked by financialisation in the GFC, the World Bank has
          become a proponent of it being extended to aid and development finance; the ‘overall strategy is to
          policy-engineer a shift towards securities-based financial systems and thus render DECs [developing and
          emerging countries] more amenable to the forces of financialised capitalism’ (Gabor 2018, 16). While the
          overall strategy is clear, the precise methods for implementation are less so. One method is issuing new
          kinds of bonds, such as green bonds, <a class="item2"></a>IDA bonds, the <a class="item2"></a>world’s first
          blockchain bond, and <a class="item2"></a>Indonesian women’s empowerment bonds (World Bank 2019). A second
          method is the ‘cascade approach’ that identifies imperfections that may be stopping private capital from
          investing in projects. If addressing the imperfection is not enough, subsidies and guarantees may be needed
          to leverage private investment and only when such reforms are still not attracting private investment can
          public investment be considered (Gabor 2018). It thus combines an ideological preference for private
          investment over public regardless of profitability or efficiency, with a preference for financialised
          capitalism over traditional banking. For example, the Bank issued catastrophe bonds in 2016 through the
          Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility (PEFF), a mechanism pioneered by insurance companies to pay high
          interest rates on the basis that investors may lose some of or all their money. The Bank’s PEFF bond had a
          complex set of triggers before they could be paid out, leading to an expectation that they would not be. But,
          the COVID-19 crisis met all the triggers and so investors lost their principal (Mackenzie 2020). The Bank
          created <a class="item2"></a>PEFF bonds to build a new market in securitised risk but given most investors
          are loss adverse, they will be less likely to purchase them again in the future (Mackenzie 2020). More to the
          point, such innovative financial instruments may have a strong structure, ‘but from almost any angle, they
          look fundamentally ill-suited to protecting vulnerable people from diseases, disaster, or climate change’
          (Mackenzie 2020).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          With Trump appointee David Malpass as the incumbent president (see <a class="item2">Table 4.3</a>), the Bank
          became more concerned with the growth of debt, which the IMF had been warning about for a few years. Yet, the
          COVID-19 pandemic has left no option but for a big increase in lending as bilateral donors are not increasing
          grant resources. The Bank has said they will provide $160 billion in frontloaded funds to help states respond
          to the <a class="item2"></a>crisis and other MDBs will private $80 billion. They are also frontloading grants
          through their COVID-19 <a class="item2"></a>Fast Track Facility, but more loans will follow.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In 2020, the Bank Group’s ambitious mission was to end extreme poverty by decreasing the percentage of people
          living on less than $1.90 a day to no more than 3% by 2030 and to promote shared prosperity by fostering the
          income growth of the bottom 40% of people in every country. But, just like the MDGs, this formulation is an
          accounting illusion that narrowly focusses on inequality by promoting income growth. This brings us back to
          the centrality of the Bank’s original purposes, which can be summarised as facilitating investment in
          productive purposes and promoting private investment and trade.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.3.2 Key developments in other MDBs</h3>
<div class="item">
          The late 2000s and 2010s saw an across-the-board improvement in the organisational functioning and loan
          portfolios of the regional, sub-regional, and specialised development banks, particularly among a few smaller
          MDBs that had struggled during the 1980s and 1990s. Such improvements coincided with organisational
          restructurings, an expansion of capital availability, and new leadership. In the case of the RDBs, however,
          most of which had also lent counter-cyclically during the 2007–8 GFC, they had a larger decline in lending in
          the early 2010s than the World Bank, which has been attributed to downward pressure from credit rating
          agencies (Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli 2018).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In the case of the SRDBs, successful reform occurred across several continents. In Africa, the
          <abbr>EADB</abbr> went from severe financial mismanagement during the 2000s to significant organisational
          restructuring and the recovery of outstanding loans under Director General Vivienne Yeda, who was appointed
          in 2009. As a result, Yeda received several financial and banking awards, including the African Banker of the
          Year Award in 2014. At the TDB, President Adamassu Tadesse, who received the same African Banker Award in
          2019, spearheaded a dramatic reformation of the African SRDB, including growing equity capital and annual
          profits four-fold between 2012 and 2019, attracting 15 new shareholders, and receiving the TDB’s first
          investment grade rating from Moody’s in 2017 (Africa Fintech Summit 2019). The TDB’s reform process began in
          2000 and the overall result is that it is now substantially larger than the four African SRDBs that were
          created before it (Humphrey 2019). In Latin America, <abbr>CAF</abbr> came to rival the IADB and exceed World
          Bank Latin American and Caribbean commitments during the 2010s, which is indicative of the change in fortunes
          and expansion of operations of so many MDBs (Humphrey 2014, 2016).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In Europe, the NDF, after almost being dissolved in the 2000s, instituted a series of institutional reforms
          in 2009, shifting its mandate from soft loans for social and economic development to grants for climate
          change interventions in low-income countries (Amland 2018, Normann 2019). This was an attempt to not only
          satisfy the competing interests of its Nordic shareholders but also to better find its niche within MDF
          (Wihtol 2013). The <abbr>CEB</abbr>, its relevance revitalised in the 1990s with the collapse of the Soviet
          Union and reintegration of people from the former Soviet bloc into capitalist Europe, renewed its pertinence
          once again in response to the refugee crisis affecting Europe since the mid-2010s.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In Eastern Europe and Central Asia, the IIB underwent considerable restructuring in 2012. Following two
          decades of stagnation in the wake of the Soviet Union’s collapse, new management entered the former
          Soviet-led MDB to make it a modern-day development bank. A revised agreement in 2014 saw it shift to a much
          more capitalist agenda of ‘promoting economic growth, increasing the competitiveness of national economies,
          expanding trade and economic ties, and maximising investment interaction opportunities’ (IIB 2018, 1). The
          IIB also entered debt capital markets in 2014, the first time in its history, and began issuing bonds in
          Russia, Slovakia, and Romania.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In a range of ways, the 2010s saw a closer alignment between the MDBs as to what a development bank ‘should’
          look like. In addition to broad harmonisation efforts, another example is the increasingly close alignment on
          climate finance following the 2015 Paris Agreement (see <a class="item2">Chapter 10</a>) and further many
          MDBs followed the World Bank’s lead in increasing their financial innovation engagement.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.3.3 New MDBs</h3>
<div class="item">
          Two new MDBs emerged during the retroliberal era, the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, and they were designed as
          traditional development banks. The NDB (2015, 1) adopts neutral language in its purposes, aiming to ‘mobilize
          resources for infrastructure and sustainable development projects in <abbr>BRICS</abbr> and other emerging
          economies and developing countries,’ and the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> (<a class="item2"></a>2015, 2), largely
          duplicating the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s Charter, has a strong profit focus prioritising ‘infrastructure and other
          productive sectors,’ despite being founded by an ostensibly socialist state. The absence of references to
          poverty reduction in the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>’s founding documents speaks to them being business-link
          banks, at odds with the SDGs; the new MDBs conform to the ‘GDP-centred, Northern-development-model approach’
          (Dossani 2014).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Promoting private capital is remarkably prominent in the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>Articles of
          Agreement, giving the MDB responsibility for its promotion in the region. The Articles suggest that, as
          argued above, the practice of this China-led development financier is not much friendly to the state than the
          old traditional MDBs. The NDB is a little more conspicuous in its purposes, referring to ‘support’ for public
          and private projects. The similarities of purposes and inclusion of facilitating private investment
          demonstrates that the new MDBs aim to promote debt-based, capitalist expansion in the same way as the old
          ones have.
        </div>
</section>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">4.4 Conclusion</h2>
<div class="item">
        There are so many dimensions to the MDBs discussed in <a class="item2">Chapters 3</a> and <a class="item2">4</a> that it is hard to offer simple conclusions. The chapters highlight the connections between MDB
        creation, geopolitics, economic theory, and debt. They demonstrate that there is a fair degree of coherence
        around the aims and objectives of the MDBs; almost all exhibit a Keynesian influence, which is not surprising
        given their logic is the Keynesian idea that markets will not always ensure adequate levels of investment. Some
        are more statist, others more pragmatic, and the EBRD brought in a neoliberal tone, but, in the end, they are
        all focussed on promoting market-based economic growth in line with banking principles. There is a remarkable
        consensus around the need for more and more debt to promote economic growth, despite there still being no
        orderly default and restructuring mechanism for states at the international level.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Many of the MDBs started out with strong regional missions but few have been able to live up to them in
        practice; not many governments want to be burdened by joint loans that they may not get an equal share of
        benefits from. This demonstrates the dominance of the state in development discourse and it permeates the
        analysis and lending strategies of the MDBs too. The MDBs have helped naturalise the idea that states are
        actual and effective units that can control development challenges at the same time as their banking and
        neoliberal logics lead them to want to constrain the state and promote the benefits of markets. This is the
        tension at the heart of the MDBs.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The durability of the MDB model and the MDBs themselves are further factors that leap out of the analysis –
        ‘once established MDBs do not disappear, but rather transform and evolve’ (Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli
        2018, 21). The <a class="item2"></a><abbr>BDEGL</abbr> is the only suspended MDB we have found and even it
        still exists on paper. Still, as the chapter demonstrates, many MDBs have faced challenges. Nonetheless, they
        are substantial financial actors. The 23 MDBs studied by Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli (2018, 49) had a total
        portfolio (loans, equity investments, and debt securities) of $1.13 trillion in 2016 or 1.6% of world GDP,
        which was a decline from earlier in the decade. In addition, states have turned to the idea of creating new
        MDBs time and again when faced with obstacles, which suggests they consider productive investment of the
        trillions of dollars that now float around the world is an ongoing challenge. States seem to like the influence
        that MDBs provide and, as <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a> shows, once established MDBs are quite cheap for them.
        The next chapter focusses on the structure of the MDBs and it emphasises how their structure as banks has been
        a long-underestimated influence. Indeed, Kapur, Lewis, and Webb (1997, 1111) note that at times the World
        Bank’s ‘financial and development personas’ have been ‘more competitive than complementary.’
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>
<ol class="biblioentrylist">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
<abbr>AFESD</abbr>. 1997. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 1997</em>. Safat, Kuwait: Arab Fund for Economic and Social
            Development.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Africa Fintech Summit. 2019. “5 Questions with Admassu Tadesse, President &amp; Chief Executive of Trade
            and Development Bank (TDB).” <a class="item2" href="https://africafintechsummit.com">https://africafintechsummit.com/2019/11/19/5-questions-with-admassu-tadesse-president-chief-executive-of-trade-and-development-bank-tdb/</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
<abbr>AIIB</abbr>. 2015. Articles of Agreement. Beijing: Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Amland, Bjørn H. 2018. “Nordic Donors to Discuss Strengthening Nordic Development Fund.” Development Today.
            <a class="item2" href="http://www.development-today.com">http://www.development-today.com/magazine/Frontpage/nordic_donors_to_discuss_strengthening_nordic_development_fund</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Amsden, Alice. 1989. <em class="calibre4">Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialisation</em>. New York: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Babb, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Behind the Development Banks: Washington Politics, World Poverty, and the Wealth of
            Nations</em>. Chicago, IL and London: The University of Chicago Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton, Nora Lustig, Ken Rogoff, and Edward Hsu. 2006. An Evaluation of World Bank
            Research, 1998–2005. September 24. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2018. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and Transferring Development: Policy Movement through
            Technical Assistance</em>. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bello, Walden. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Dark Victory: The United States, Structural Adjustment, and Global Poverty</em>.
            London: Pluto.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bissio, Roberto. 2003. “Civil Society and the MDGs.” <em class="calibre4">Development Policy Journal</em> 3 (April):151–60.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bond, Patrick. 2015. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> and the Sub-imperial Location.” In <em class="calibre4"><abbr>BRICS</abbr>: An
            Anti-Capitalist Critique</em>, edited by Ana Garcia and Patrick Bond, 15–26. Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bonizzi, Bruno, Christina Laskaridis, and Jan Toporowski. 2019. “Global Liquidity, the Private Sector and
            Debt Sustainability in Sub-Saharan Africa.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (5):1430–54. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12507.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Booth, David. 2008. <em class="calibre4">Aid Effectiveness after Accra: How to Reform the ‘Paris agenda’</em>. London: ODI.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bracking, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Money and Power: Great Predators in the Political Economy of Development</em>.
            London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Broad, Robin. 2004. “The Washington Consensus Meets the Global Backlash: Shifting Debates and Policies.”
            <em class="calibre4">Globalizations</em> 1 (2):129–54.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
<abbr>BSTDB</abbr>. 2019. Medium-Term Strategy and Business Plan 2019–2022. Black Sea Trade and Development
            Bank. Accessed 1 June 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.bstdb.org">https://www.bstdb.org/MTSBP_2019-2022.pdf</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cahill, Damien. 2014. <em class="calibre4">The End of Laissez-Faire? On the Durability of Embedded Neoliberalism</em>.
            Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cammack, Paul. 2004. “What the World Bank Means by Poverty Reduction and Why it Matters.” <em class="calibre4">New Political
            Economy</em> 9 (2):189–211.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Carroll, Toby. 2010. <em class="calibre4">Delusions of Development: The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in
            Southeast Asia</em>. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cevallos, Ricardo. 1996. “The Central American Bank for Economic Integration.” <em class="calibre4">Tulane Journal of
            International and Comparative Law</em> 4 (2):245–74.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Chang, Ha-Joon. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategy in Historical Perspective</em>.
            London: Anthem Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Chossudovsky, Michel. 1997. <em class="calibre4">The Globalisation of Poverty: Impacts of IMF and World Bank Reforms</em>.
            London: Zed Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Delikanli, Ihsan Ugur, Todor Dimitrov, and Roena Agolli. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Multilateral Development Banks:
            Governance and Finance</em>. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Dossani, Sameer. 2014. <abbr>BRICS</abbr> Bank: New Bottle, How’s the Wine? <em class="calibre4">Bretton Woods Bulletin</em>
            (Februrary).
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            EBRD. 2013. Basic Documents of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. London: European Bank
            for Reconstruction and Development. Accessed 11 March 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.ebrd.com">https://www.ebrd.com/news/publications/institutional-documents/basic-documents-of-the-ebrd.html</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan. 2010. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in Vietnam and Indonesia:
            Inheritance of Loss</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan, and Adrian Robert Bazbauers. 2020. “Multilateral Development Banks: Washington Consensus,
            Beijing Consensus or Banking Consensus?” In <em class="calibre4">Rethinking Multilateralism in Foreign Aid: Beyond the
            Neoliberal Hegemony</em>, edited by Viktor Jakupc, Max Kelly and Jonathan Makuwira, 113–31. Abingdon, Oxon
            and New York: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Fine, Ben. 2001. <em class="calibre4">Social Capital versus Social Theory: Political Economy and Social Science at the Turn
            of the Millennium</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Fine, Ben. 2005. “The New Development Economics.” In <em class="calibre4">The New Development Economics: After the
            Washington Consensus</em>, edited by K.S. Jomo and Ben Fine, 1–20. New Delhi: Tulika Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gabor, Daniela. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Understanding the Financialisation of International Development through 11
            FAQs</em>. Washington, DC: Heinrich Böll Stiftung North America.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gabor, Daniela. 2020. The Wall Street Consensus. SocArXiv papers.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            George, Susan, and Fabrizio Sabelli. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Faith and Credit: The World Bank’s Secular Empire</em>.
            London: Penguin Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Goldin, Ian, Mike Mariathasan, Co-Pierre Georg, and Tiffany Vogel. 2014. “The Financial Sectors.” In
            <em class="calibre4">The Butterfly Defect: How Globalization Creates Systemic Risk, and What To Do about it</em>, edited by
            Ian Goldin and Mike Mariathasan, 36–69. Princeton, NJ and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gowan, Peter. 1999. <em class="calibre4">The Global Gamble: Washington’s Faustian Bid for World Dominance</em>. London:
            Verso.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Greenwald, Bruce C., and Joesph Stiglitz. 1986. “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and
            Incomplete Markets.” <em class="calibre4">Quarterly Journal of Economics</em> 90 (2):229–64.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Harvey, David. 2010. <em class="calibre4">The Enigma of Capital: And the Crises of Capitalism</em>. Oxford: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Hickel, Jason. 2016. “The True Extent of Global Poverty and Hunger: Questioning the Good News Narrative of
            the Millennium Development Goals.” <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em> 37 (5):749–67.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Hulme, David. 2009. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs): A Short History of the World’s Biggest
            Promise. University of Manchester, Brooks World Poverty Institute. BWPI Working Paper 100, Manchester.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2014. “The Politics of Loan Pricing in Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">Review of
            International Political Economy</em> 21 (3):611–39. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2013.858365.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2016. “The Invisible Hand: Financial Pressures and Organisational Convergence in
            Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Journal of Development Studies</em> 52 (1):92–112. doi:
            10.1080/00220388.2015.1075978.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2019. “‘Minilateral’ Development Banks: What the Rise of Africa’s Trade and Development
            Bank Says about Multilateral Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):164–90. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12467.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            IIB. 2018. Agreement Concerning the Establishment of an International Investment Bank. New York: United
            Nations – Treaty Series Volume 801, 1975. Accessed 11 March 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://treaties.un.org">https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/Volume%20801/v801.pdf</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Jakupec, Viktor, and Max Kelly. 2019. <em class="calibre4">Foreign Aid in the Age of Populism: Political Economy Analysis
            from Washington to Beijing</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kapur, Devesh, John P. Lewis, and Richard Webb. 1997. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank Its First Half Century, Volume 1:
            History</em>. 2 vols. Vol. 1: History. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kellerman, Miles. 2019. “The Proliferation of Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International
            Organization</em> 14 (1):107–45. doi: 10.1007/s11558-018-9302-y.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kose, M. Ayhan, Peter Nagle, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Naotaka Sugawara. 2020. <em class="calibre4">Global Waves of Debt:
            Causes and Consequences</em>. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Leiva, Fernando Ignacio. 2008. “Towards a Critique of Latin American Neostructuralism.” <em class="calibre4">Latin American
            Politics and Society</em> 50 (4):1–25.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Lin, Justin Yifu, and Yan Wang. 2017. <em class="calibre4">Going Beyond Aid: Development Cooperation for Structural
            Transformation</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mackenzie, Kate. 2020. <em class="calibre4">Climate Change Is a Complex Problem, But Complex Financial Products Aren’t the
            Solution</em>. New York: Bloomberg Wire Service.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mak, James, and Seiji Finch Naya. 1994. “Is There a Need for a Pacific Islands Development Bank?”
            <em class="calibre4">Pacific Economic Bulletin</em> 9 (2):35–40.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mares, David R., and Harold A. Trinkunas. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Aspirational Power: Brazil on the Long Road to Global
            Influence</em>. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Marshall, Katherine. 2008. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank: From Reconstruction to Development to Equity</em>. Abingdon:
            Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mawdsley, Emma, Warwick E. Murray, John Overton, Regina Scheyvens, and Glenn Banks. 2018. “Exporting
            Stimulus and “Shared Prosperity”: Reinventing Foreign Aid for a Retroliberal Era.” <em class="calibre4">Development Policy
            Review</em> 63 (S1):O25–43. doi: 10.1111/dpr.12282.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mistry, Percy S., and Lolette Kritzinger-van Niekerk. 1998. Development Finance and the Need for a
            Sub-Regional Development Financing Institution in SADC. Southern African Development Community Finance
            &amp; Investment Sector Coordinating Unit Research Project.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Murray, Warwick E., and John Overton. 2016. “Retroliberalism and the New Aid Regime of the 2010s.”
            <em class="calibre4">Progress in Development Studies</em> 16 (3):244–60. doi: 10.1177/1464993416641576.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            NDB. 2015. Agreement on the New Development Bank. Shanghai: New Development Bank. Accessed 12 March 2020.
            <a class="item2" href="https://www.ndb.int">https://www.ndb.int/data-and-documents/ndb-core-documents/</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Normann, Henrik. 2019. Nordic Investment Bank – Henrik Normann – Answers to UNSW Survey 15.5.2019, edited
            by Adrian Robert Bazbauers: UNSW Canberra.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            North, Douglass C. 1998. “The New Institutional Economics and Third World Development.” In <em class="calibre4">The New
            Institutional Economics and Third World Development</em>, edited by John Harriss, Janet Hunter and Colin M.
            Lewis, 17–26. London: Routledge. Original edition, 1995.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            OECD. 2011. “Aid Effectiveness 2005–10: Progress in Implementing the Paris Declaration.” OECD Publishing.
            Accessed 15 January 2013. <a class="item2" href="http://www.oecd.org">http://www.oecd.org/dac/aideffectiveness/48742718.pdf</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Ortiz, Isabel, Matthew Cummins, Jeronim Capaldo, and Kalaivani Karunanethy. 2020. <em class="calibre4">The Decade of
            Adjustment: A Review of Austerity Trends 2010–2020 in 187 Countries</em>. Geneva: International Labour
            Office.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2014. “Institutional Isomorphism and the Asian Development Bank’s Accountability Mechanism:
            Something Old, Something New, Something Borrowed, Something Blue?” <em class="calibre4">The Pacific Review</em> 27
            (2):217–39.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2017. “Accountability as Justice for the Multilateral Development Banks? Borrower Opposition
            and Bank Avoidance to US Power and Influence.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International Political Economy</em> 24
            (5):776–801. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2017.1363798.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Pérez, Pedro Páez. 2009–10. “The Ecuadorian Proposal for a New Regional Financial Architecture.”
            <em class="calibre4">Journal of Post Keynesian Economic</em> 32 (2):163–72.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Rich, Bruce. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Mortgaging the Earth: The World Bank, Environmental Impoverishment, and the Crisis
            of Development</em>. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Robinson, William. 2015. “The Transnational State and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: A Global Capitalism
            Perspective.” <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em> 36 (1):1–21.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Rosales, Antulio. 2013. “The Banco del Sur and the Return to Development.” <em class="calibre4">Latin American
            Perspectives</em> 40 (5):27–43.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Saith, Ashwani. 2006. “From Universal Values to Millennium Development Goals: Lost in Translation.”
            <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 37 (6):1167–99.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Stiglitz, Joesph. 2000. “The Insider: What I Learned at the World Economic Crisis.” <em class="calibre4">New Republic</em>
            222 (16/17):57–60.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Stiglitz, Joesph. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Globalization and Its Discontents</em>. London: Penguin Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Szasz, Paul C. 1999. “Establishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development.” <em class="calibre4">Studies in
            Transnational Legal Policy</em> 31–32:32–43.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            The New Times. 2009. CEPGL Mulls Reopening Bank. Accessed 1 June 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.newtimes.co.rw">https://www.newtimes.co.rw/section/read/80411/</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Thurbon, Elizabeth. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Developmental Mindset: The Revival of Financial Activism in South Korea</em>.
            Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Toye, John. 1993. <em class="calibre4">Dilemmas of Development</em>, 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Uhlin, Anders. 2016. “Civil Society and Policy Reforms in the Asian Development Bank.” In <em class="calibre4">Global
            Economic Governance and the Practices of the Multilateral Development Banks</em>, edited by Susan Park and
            Jonathan R. Strand, 60–79. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wade, Robert. 1996. “Japan, the World Bank, and the Art of Paradigm Maintenance: <em class="calibre4">The East Asian
            Miracle</em> in Political Perspective.” <em class="calibre4">New Left Review</em> 217:3–36.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wade, Robert. 2001. “Showdown at the World Bank.” <em class="calibre4">New Left Review</em> 7:124–37.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wade, Robert. 2018. “The Developmental State: Dead or Alive?” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 49
            (2):518–46. doi: 10.1111/dech.12381.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wihtol, Robert. 2013. “NDF and the Case for Niche Development Funds.” Development Today. <a class="item2" href="http://www.development-today.com">http://www.development-today.com/magazine/2013/dt_14-15/opinion/ndf_and_the_case_for_niche_development_funds</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Williamson, John. 1990. “What Washington Means by Policy Reform.” In <em class="calibre4">Latin American Readjustment: How
            Much Has Happened</em>, edited by John Williamson, 7–20. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for
            International Economics.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Willis, Katie. 2005. <em class="calibre4">Theories and Practices of Development</em>. New York: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Woods, Ngaire. 2006. <em class="calibre4">The Globalizers: The IMF, the World Bank, and Their Borrowers</em>. Ithaca, NY and
            London: Cornell University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            World Bank. 1993. <em class="calibre4">The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy</em>. Oxford: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2019. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 2019: Ending Poverty. Investing in Opportunity</em>. Washington, DC:
            World Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Yağcı, Mustafa. 2016. “A Beijing Consensus in the Making: The Rise of Chinese Initiatives in the
            International Political Economy and Implications for Developing Countries.” <em class="calibre4">Perceptions</em> XXI
            (2):29–56.
          </div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<h1 class="toc"><a class="item2" href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter5">5 The structure of multilateral development
    banks</a></h1>
<div class="item">
      This chapter analyses the structure of the MDBs, positioning the World Bank as the archetype and exploring how
      the other MDBs are similar or different. The chapter starts with voting systems and capital subscriptions and how
      these have shaped Bank operations. Next, the Bank’s governance structure is outlined, analysing the relative
      influence of its Governors, Directors, and senior management. The chapter then turns to the Bank’s lending system
      – types of loans, conditionality, procurement, and interest rates. <a class="item2">Table 5.2</a> systematically
      compares the Bank’s structures to those of other MDBs, highlighting organisational convergences and divergences.
    </div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">5.1 The structure of the World Bank</h2>
<div class="item">
        The MDBs are all structured like private banks, following the model established by the IBRD. They have
        shareholders, predominantly states, contributing capital in return for shares and <a class="item2"></a>voting
        rights. An analysis of vote allocations, capitalisation, governance structures, and lending capacity may seem
        quite technical, but it is critical to understand the MDBs as organisations to comprehend their strengths and
        limitations and thus their role in development finance.
      </div>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">5.1.1 Voting rights</h3>
<div class="item">
          The negotiators at the 1944 <a class="item2"></a>Bretton Woods conference did not spend much time debating
          the IBRD’s organisational structure – Article V of the Bank’s establishing agreement is ‘nearly an exact copy
          of the [IMF’s] Articles XII and XIII’ (Mason and Asher 1973, 29). Article V outlines the Bank’s organisation
          and management, including its governance structure, system of voting rights, and location of offices. The
          voting rights were the ‘realist’ heart at the centre of post-war international economic organisation building
          at Bretton Woods. Closely following Harry Dexter White’s 1942 draft (Oliver 1971), IBRD voting rights were
          linked to the number of shares held – each member had 250 basic votes plus one additional vote for each share
          of stock held. The size of each country’s capital subscription was originally based on relative economy size
          and later subscriptions to IDA were added to encourage donations to the Bank’s concessional arm. Further,
          there is little incentive for developing countries to have large subscriptions because they are independent
          of borrowing rights; this is in contrast to the IMF, where subscriptions are linked to drawing rights (Mason
          and Asher 1973). This means that many borrowing members have little influence over the Bank, an issue
          identified as a severe democratic deficit in the MDB.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Basic votes are a compromise between equal representation and power-based voting, and some MDBs have more
          basic votes per member than others. In the IBRD’s case, capital increases were not matched by an expansion of
          basic votes, so their value has significantly declined (Leech and Leech 2006). Basic votes were later capped
          at a low 5.55% of total votes but generally have been below that. In some of the other MDBs, basic votes were
          set as a percentage of total votes from the outset. For example, basic votes are 20% of total votes in the
          <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, while they are 12% in the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, with founding <abbr>AIIB</abbr> members
          getting an additional 600 votes giving them greater weight, though the value of these will decline as the
          capital stock increases. Several MDBs also have different formulas for regional and non-regional members,
          generally with the aim of increasing the power of developing regional member countries.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The largest shareholders in the IBRD – those countries that provide the main guarantee behind the Bank’s bond
          issues and loans on capital markets – were originally those from the Global North, namely the US and Western
          European countries. With the refusal of the Soviet Union to ratify the Bretton Woods agreement, the US had
          35.07% of votes in 1946 and the US and European countries combined controlled 74% (Mason and Asher 1973,
          800–02). Even with an influx of new members in the 1960s, the US and Europeans still held 61% in June 1971.
          Japan pushed to increase its shareholding in the early 1970s (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). After the
          creation of the IDA add-on in 1960, adjustments to Bank shareholding reflected not just the member’s economic
          weight but also contributions to the Bank’s concessional arm. In practice, however, political factors have
          always weighed in too.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          China and other emerging economies began campaigns in the 1990s to gain more influence in the Bretton Woods
          institutions and other international organisations, to better reflect geopolitical changes. The Bank
          undertook what was described as major ‘voice’ reforms after a call from the <a class="item2"></a>UN
          International Conference on Financing for Development held in Monterrey in 2002. The revised quota framework
          was said to be 75% based on the size of state’s GDP, IDA contributions were given 20% weighting, and 5%
          weighting was given to country’s borrowings. The formulas were never formally published however, and
          countries did not have to agree to reductions, so the basis of decision-making remains unclear (Vestergaard
          2010). Shareholding changes introduced in 2008 and 2010 produced only a 4.5% transfer from the Global North
          to developing and transition countries and much less for low-income countries (Vestergaard 2010)! By 2020,
          the top six shareholders in the IBRD were the US, whose 15.44% shareholding grants it veto power over certain
          key decisions, followed by Japan (7.75%), China (4.78%), Germany (4.08%), France (3.8%), and the UK (3.8%).
          Resolving over- and under-representation is difficult for the Bank and the rapid growth of emerging economies
          exacerbates this. Nevertheless, it can be said that: (i) high-income countries as a group remain
          over-represented; (ii) China is significantly under-represented, as is India; and (iii) low-income countries
          are over-represented relative to their GDP but still have just a tiny fraction of voting power (Vestergaard
          2010).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The IBRD’s governing structure is made up of a Board of Governors, with representatives appointed from each
          member country, a Board of Directors, and a President nominally elected by the Executive Directors. Almost
          all MDBs follow this structure, or a close variant thereof, e.g., the <abbr>EADB</abbr> has a Director
          General in lieu of a President, although the role is analogous. Governors are generally appointed by
          ministries of finance, though sometimes by Treasury or state departments or central banks – they rarely come
          from national aid agencies. The World Bank’s Board of Governors is the supreme decision-making body, but its
          formal responsibilities are limited to admitting and suspending members, adjudicating appeals from the
          Directors on interpretations of the Bank’s Articles, and increasing and decreasing the capital stock. Most
          formal power including setting strategic directions and approving lending operations is vested in the
          Directors, but in practice the President and senior management have substantial control. Directors are
          elected for two-year terms and are paid by the Bank, not member governments. There were originally 12
          Directors, but this grew to 24 in 1992 following an expansion of country membership, and in 2010 an
          additional Director for sub-Saharan Africa was added, bringing the total to 25. Larger boards can lead to
          better representation but can also complicate decision-making and coordination (Babb 2009).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The largest shareholders get to appoint Directors. For many decades, this meant the US, the UK, Germany,
          France, and Japan, but today also includes China. Other countries generally pool their votes in relatively
          stable constituencies, with directorships usually held by the largest constituency members. These elections
          do not precisely follow the IBRD’s Articles (Strand and Retzl 2016). Directors cast the number of votes that
          they control or have obtained at their election and voting for all IBRD decisions is 50% of votes cast, with
          a few key exceptions. The first is that capital increases require 75% of voting power, but the specification
          that members have the right to an equal subscription when there is a capital increase means that no country
          can have its shareholdings reduced without agreeing, so capital increases effectively require unanimous
          approval (Vestergaard 2010). Second, amending the Articles of Agreement requires three-fifths of members and
          85% of voting power, increased from 80% in 1989, allowing the US to retain its veto. Finally, unanimous
          agreement is required to modify clauses on the right to withdraw from the IBRD, rights to subscribe to
          increases in the authorised capital stock, and limitations on liability.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Earlier Executive Director constituencies were sometimes based on historical or colonial relationships and
          there were often groups with a member from the Global North who dominated. Australia is an interesting
          example, as it formed a group in 1953 with the Union of South Africa, Vietnam joined in 1957, and New Zealand
          in 1965. By 1971, the group was without Vietnam. Then, in 2003, Australia was paired with New Zealand,
          Cambodia, the Republic of Korea, Mongolia, Palau, and seven Pacific Island nations. In 2020, the group was
          almost the same, except the seven Pacific states had expanded to ten and the group’s 3.45% voting power
          expanded to 3.99%. <em class="calibre4">Contra</em> the Australian example, most groups rarely change composition (Strand and
          Retzl 2016). The Russian Federation has a Director elected based on their shareholding, though Syria joined
          their constituency. Equally, Saudi Arabia is a single-member constituency. These two single-seat groups ‘mean
          that the remaining voting groups are larger than they otherwise would be, thus potentially reducing the
          formal voice of members represented by elected’ Directors (Strand and Retzl 2016, 420). Most other Directors
          are elected based on geographical groupings, though there are mixed constituencies, including the Philippines
          with several Latin American states and Switzerland with Eastern European and Central Asian states.
          Sub-Saharan Africa is represented by three groups, one with Angola, Nigeria, and South Africa and two others
          with over 20 states in each, which remain by far the largest groupings despite reforms enacted to address
          inequitable representation (Strand and Retzl 2016, 429). The Board is the same for the IBRD, IDA, and IFC
          though voting power differs, for example, the US holds only 10.06% shareholding in the IDA.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Almost all other MDBs operate along similar structures, with voting power linked to shareholding and
          allocated relative to their economic size. They can have higher or lower percentages of basic votes and some
          grant regional membership voting privileges over non-regional ones. The newly created NDB is the only MDB
          with equal voting power in 2020, but this may change when and if other countries are admitted. Further, some
          MDBs have financial institutions as shareholders in addition to countries. For example, the <abbr>BOAD</abbr>
          has eight regional member countries, the Central Bank of West African States, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and the
          EIB, three non-regional member states, and three financial institutions acting on behalf of Germany, India,
          and China. The admission of such eclectic members enabled <abbr>BOAD</abbr> to raise funds on bond markets,
          which it was previously unable to do due to capital and credit rating limitations of its regional member
          countries.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The shareholding system reflects a corporate governance model and is subject to similar vagaries with many
          MDBs having a dominant shareholder or group of shareholders, which creates problems around hegemonic power.
          Voting is usually pursued by consensus, but this often means appointed Directors set outcomes for their
          constituencies (Leech and Leech 2006). As Strand and Retzl (2016, 419) note, this is an expression of the
          power of major shareholders and weighted voting casts ‘long shadows over negotiations.’ There are no rules
          about whose interests elected Directors represent, which becomes particularly tricky in large constituencies
          (Leech and Leech 2006, Woods 2006), and quality control can be problematic in the absence of an independent
          evaluation office that reports to the Board (Ben-Artzi 2016).
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">5.1.2 <a class="item6"></a>Capital subscriptions</h3>
<div class="item">
          As shareholder banks, four factors shape MDB lending capacity: first, their size or total capitalisation;
          second, the amount of capital that is paid-in and the amount callable; third, the creditworthiness – or
          perceptions thereof – of the largest shareholders; and, fourth, their debt-to-lending ratios. When first
          established, the IBRD held $10 billion capital stock, which was not enough to meet Europe’s post-war
          reconstruction needs; hence, it was quickly superseded by the Marshall Plan. The cash-strapped British
          successfully argued to reduce the amount of paid-in capital from the 50% of total capital that White proposed
          to 20% (Gardner 1980, Mason and Asher 1973). Of the paid-in capital, only 2% had to be paid in US dollars or
          gold with the remainder in the member’s currency. This meant in the early years, when the US dollar was the
          only convertible currency, the Bank’s loanable funds were limited to contributions in dollars or gold (Mason
          and Asher 1973). As Engel (2010, 29) argued, the ‘small initial capital stock and even smaller paid-in
          component made the Bank reliant on financial markets for capital, which profoundly shaped its subsequent
          operations.’ Add to this a conservative debt-to-lending ratio adopted by IBRD management and clearly the Bank
          established a cautious business model that prioritised banking principles (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). This
          model was emulated in the regional, sub-regional, and specialised development banks, many of which function
          more as banks than development agencies (Ben-Artzi 2016), with their loan policies, financial management, and
          country risk assessment designed to ensure bond market approvals (Humphrey 2016).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          For the IBRD in its early years, support from financial markets meant gaining allies on Wall Street (Caufield
          1998). The preference for bankers as IBRD President (see <a class="item2">Chapters 3</a> and <a class="item2">4</a>) and in other key management roles was meant to gain investor trust. The corollary was that
          very few staff had development backgrounds (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). Still, in the post-war years,
          caution around international bonds persisted, thus raising capital was difficult for the Bank. When
          established in the mid-2010s, the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr> followed the pattern of the early MDBs, with
          senior staff often coming across from finance sector firms like Goldman Sachs (Engel and Bazbauers 2018).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2"></a>Credit rating agencies (<abbr>CRAs</abbr>) were a major influence on the MDBs from the
          outset because the ranking of MDB bonds were a major factor in their saleability. There are four key elements
          to <abbr>CRA</abbr> ratings of MDBs (Ben-Artzi 2016, Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli 2018, Humphrey 2014,
          Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). First, they examine if the MDB has preferred creditor status. Second,
          <abbr>CRAs</abbr> assess the soundness of the countries and projects that MDBs lend to and for. In terms of
          the countries lent to, this encourages the MDBs to have a substantial share of their loan portfolio with
          credit-worthy middle-income countries. The World Bank has come under criticism for its lending to high
          middle-income countries, particularly its lending to China (see Behar 2012). In terms of the soundness of
          individual loans, this led the IBRD to prioritise project lending in its early years, despite a mandate to
          finance programme lending (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). As early Bank staffer Victor Urquidi (1996, 48)
          said, the ‘Bank’s “bottom line” in judging a project was the “times earned column” on a spreadsheet.’
          However, it has always been perceptions of project quality rather than reality that matters because of the
          substantial gap between when projects are approved and when they are completed and their outcomes are
          evaluated (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). The third way <abbr>CRAs</abbr> judge MDBs is the stability of their
          major shareholders. In other words: do they have rich industrialised member states? This is because they are
          the ones that would realistically be able to contribute callable capital should an MDB ever need it. The
          consequence is that MDBs with fewer wealthy member states have reduced access to financial markets. The
          <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, for example, admitted non-African shareholders to improve its capital base (English and
          Mule 1996). Fourth, <abbr>CRAs</abbr> use a range of financial ratios to determine MDB risk ratings,
          particularly equity-to-loan ratios to determine capital adequacy. Almost all MDBs have capital adequacy well
          above those of commercial banks and there are not many reasons for this, apart from protecting wealthy
          members from capital call-ins (Humphrey 2014). The IBRD gained its AAA credit rating from the major US
          <abbr>CRAs</abbr> in 1959 and kept it ever since. As <a class="item2">Table 5.1</a> shows, other MDBs have
          not been able to achieve this, which often reflects who their major shareholders are as much as their
          soundness as banks.
        </div>
<table class="item8" width="98%">
<caption class="item9">
<a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 5.1</em> Multilateral Development Bank credit ratings 2019 and outlook</a>
</caption>
<thead class="item10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<th class="item11">AAA</th>
<th class="item11">AA+ to AA −</th>
<th class="item11">A+ to A−</th>
<th class="item11">BBB+ to BBB−</th>
<th class="item11">BB+ to B−</th>
<th class="item11">No rating</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="calibre10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12"><abbr>AfDB</abbr> (=) <abbr>AIIB</abbr> (=) <abbr>AsDB</abbr> (=) <abbr>CEB</abbr> (=)
              EBRD (=) EIB (=) IADB (=) IBRD/IDA (=) IsDB (=) NDB (=) NIB (=)</td>
<td class="item12"><abbr>CABEI</abbr> AA (=) <abbr>CDB</abbr> AA+ (=)</td>
<td class="item12"><abbr>BSTDB</abbr> A− (+) <abbr>CAF</abbr> A+ (−) FONPLATA A− (+) IBEC A− (=) IIB A−
              (=)</td>
<td class="item12"><abbr>BOAD</abbr> BBB+ (=) <abbr>EADB</abbr> BBB− (=) EDB BBB (=)</td>
<td class="item12">EBID B+ (=) TDB BBB (=)</td>
<td class="item12"><abbr>AFESD</abbr> <abbr>BADEA</abbr> <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> ETDB IFAD OFID PIDB</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<div class="source">
          Source: Annual Reports and MDB Websites.
          <br class="calibre1"/>
          Note: Outlook positive (+), stable (=), negative (−).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          After the 2007–8 GFC, <abbr>CRAs</abbr> enacted new evaluation methodologies equating the MDBs to commercial
          banks, even though they are effectively non-profit organisations. Consequently, Humphrey (2017, 283) argues,
          ‘to retain their <a class="item2"></a>AAA bond rating, major MDBs are (i) restricting their overall capacity
          to make use of their balance sheet for development projects and (ii) limiting lending to some borrowing
          countries facing economic difficulties.’ This impacts the poorest countries that already have difficulty
          accessing credit the most because the MDBs are powerful signallers to private finance. Such limits could
          prove problematic when the next financial crisis arrives, particularly as grant finance was hollowed out over
          the 2010s. Former MDB staffers note how the <abbr>CRAs</abbr> are ‘strategy makers and even regulators’
          despite having ‘very little depth of comprehension’ about MDBs (Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli 2018, 58).
          <abbr>CRAs</abbr> regularly put demands on the MDBs, including reducing their portfolio risk and sector and
          country diversification. As a result of their inordinate impact, the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> started talks in 2015
          about establishing alternatives to the US-based <abbr>CRAs</abbr>, but with little success. The reliance on
          international banking and money markets has thus created a system that priorities banking norms over
          development ideals.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The World Bank has increased its lending capacity in two ways over the years: first, by increasing its
          capital reserves and, second, by increasing its capital base. The first general capital increase (GCI) was 14
          years after the Bank was established in 1959, which doubled its capitalisation; it was to ensure that
          increased lending did not result in too great a deterioration of its equity-to-loan ratio and was strongly
          supported by the US. Other shareholders have also bargained intensely to increase their capital share, as
          Japan did in the 1980s in the pursuit of becoming the second largest IBRD shareholder (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb
          1997).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Changes to relative IBRD shareholdings are done through Selective Capital Increases (SCIs). These generally
          follow IMF quota reviews and see countries offered additional shares to reflect their changed international
          positions, although political factors are always in the mix. This was the case in 1976 when OPEC members,
          whose economic influence increased after the 1973 oil shock, were offered larger shareholdings than their
          economies warranted as then President McNamara saw them as a potential source of new funds (Kapur, Lewis, and
          Webb 1997). The second oil shock of 1979 reduced US resistance to a new GCI, which was agreed at $40 billion.
          Following US resistance to capital increases during the mid-1980s, there was a large $78.9 billion GCI in
          1988 that shored up the Bank’s equity-to-loan ratio for quite some time. An influx of new members including
          Switzerland and former Soviet states led to further capital increases so that by 1995 the IBRD’s capital was
          $184 billion.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          It took over two decades for the next GCI because, after the 1997 <a class="item2"></a>Asian Financial
          Crisis, there was a long period of relative global economic growth and stability with private financial flows
          on the rise. The GFC brought that to an end, and led to a $58 billion GCI under President Zoellick. This 2010
          GCI was dependent on World Bank governance reforms, as were the large 2018 <a class="item2"></a>GCI and SCI
          President Kim oversaw shortly before stepping down. The 2018 capital increase was for both the IBRD’s paid-in
          ($7.5 billion) and callable ($52.6 billion) capital, with paid-in increases always harder to obtain. The
          Trump administration was critical of the Bank’s ongoing lending to China and, in return for supporting the
          capital increase, obtained commitments to operational reforms and loan pricing changes designed to reduce
          loans to China, but resulted in higher interest rate charges to all wealthier IBRD borrowers (Mayeda and
          Shankleman 2018).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli (2018, 38–9) examined 25 MDBs calculating their subscribed capital increased
          by an average of 5.7% per annum between 2007 and 2016 reaching $1.4 trillion, which in 2016 was equal to 1.8%
          of world GDP. Further, almost all MDBs retain earnings and this on average equalled 30.7% of total subscribed
          capital by 2016 (Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli 2018, 41). The very low costs of gaining influence by
          creating an MDB is likely, we think, a key reason that there are now 30 MDBs. With all the discussion about
          the recent establishment of the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and NDB, this factor was overlooked.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">5.1.3 <a class="item6"></a>Governance</h3>
<div class="item">
          The IBRD’s Articles of Agreement state that the Executive Directors select the Bank President. In practice,
          however, an informal agreement between the US and European countries means that the US proposes a
          presidential candidate for the Directors to approve and the Europeans propose the IMF Managing Director. A
          major campaign by several states, NGOs, and others started in the early 2000s pushed for a more merit-based
          selection process, this was epitomised by the 2012 Open Letter to all World Bank Governors signed by 59
          leading development NGOs and published by the Bretton Woods Project, an NGO which critically monitors World
          Bank and IMF activities. But it remains the case that ‘at the end of the day he’ – and Bank Presidents have
          only even been men – ‘is only accountable to the President of the United States and the US Congress’
          (Vestergaard 2010, 11).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          All World Bank Presidents have been US citizens, though two were born overseas: James Wolfensohn in Australia
          and Jim Yong Kim in South Korea. The US has tended to select appointees without development backgrounds and,
          up to Wolfensohn, the majority were bankers, demonstrating again that it is a bank as much as, if not more so
          than, a development agency. Since Wolfensohn, Republican administrations have adopted a more partisan
          approach, with the three Republican appointees – Paul Wolfowitz, Robert Zoellick, and David Malpass – all
          having previously served as Republican political appointees. The last two Democratic appointees did not,
          however; Wolfensohn was a banker and Kim a public health specialist. This suggests that Republicans have
          taken a far more politicised approach to the Bank than Democrats. Still, it is not uncommon for MDB
          presidents to come from the political world and strong political ties may help in negotiating capital
          increases and replenishments (Ben-Artzi 2016).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The World Bank President guides day-to-day decisions, ‘under the direction of the Executive Directors’ (World
          Bank 2012). Bank Presidents are a key influence in shaping its strategic direction, as was shown in <a class="item2">Chapters 3</a> and <a class="item2">4</a>; they ‘were not only the source of power in the
          institution; they were also the ones the staff looked to for signals that would indicate the Bank’s primary
          mission and its operational priorities in a changing world’ (Kraske 1996, vii). Still, as with all MDBs,
          there are tensions between the Boards of Governors and Directors and senior management and staff, which can
          arise from different priorities around politics, development, and bank finances and who prioritises what can
          change over time (Ben-Artzi 2016).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The location of an MDB’s headquarters is political too. In the case of the IMF and World Bank, they were to
          ‘be located in the territory of the member holding the greatest number of shares’ (World Bank 2012). The US
          chose to headquarter the IBRD in Washington, DC, so it would be under close governmental influence.
          Subsequent MDBs mostly show a similar pattern of politicking, with head office locations being a decision by
          major shareholders or a backlash against them. As examples, the IADB is in Washington DC, while the
          <abbr>AsDB</abbr> is in Manila, the Philippines, to reduce member concerns about Japanese influence.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Debates about reform to World Bank governance have arisen at least once a decade both within and outside the
          MDB, leading to a never-ending cycle of restructuring. In terms of reform, many commentators have made the
          important point that MDB governance should be as sound as the MDBs expect the governance of their borrowers
          to be. Some outside the organisation call for reform (see inter alia Ahluwalia et al. 2016, Stiglitz 2006,
          Woods 2006), while others call for a more radical rethinking of international economic governance (Amin 2014,
          Bello, Kinley, and Elinson 1982, Cammack 2002, George and Sabelli 1994). And, yet, at the end of the day,
          despite regular restructuring, the Bank’s governance as delineated by its Articles of Agreement remains
          largely unchanged since the 1940s, a template emulated by almost all other MDBs and clearly evident in both
          the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">5.1.4 <a class="item6"></a>Loans</h3>
<div class="item">
          The World Bank offers three main loan types: investment project finance, development policy loans
          (<abbr>DPLs</abbr>), and programme-for-results lending. <a class="item2"></a>Investment project finance for
          physical and social infrastructure is the Bank’s staple lending instrument and can be approved as an IBRD
          loan, IDA credit, or as a guarantee. Investments can be in any sector and can only be financed by the Bank or
          co-financed with other development agencies either as loans or grants. <abbr>DPLs</abbr> provide budget
          support to governments based on commitment to a set of policy or institutional reforms. These originated from
          what was called non-project and programme lending, which comprised an average of 6% of Bank lending up until
          the late 1970s (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997, 487). In the 1980s, the Bank launched structural adjustment
          loans (SALs) and sectoral adjustment loans (SECALs), which were conditional on macroeconomic changes.
          Adjustment lending peaked at around 30% of loans in the 1980s then declined in the 1990s. <abbr>DPLs</abbr>
          replaced SALs and SECALs in 2004 and made up roughly one-quarter of financing between 2005 and 2015, largely
          due to a spike in overall lending and emergency responses to the GFC (World Bank 2020). This is the most
          controversial lending instrument as it involves the Bank interfering in a country’s macroeconomic policies.
          Compared to the coercive reputation of SALs and SECALs, <a class="item2"></a><abbr>DPLs</abbr> are meant to
          be borrower-owned and -led, but the degree to which this is the case is questionable. <a class="item2"></a>Programme-for-results lending, previously known as programme lending, focusses investment on
          specific sectors. Funding is disbursed when pre-agreed results are achieved. This third instrument is
          focussed on lending to ‘high-performing’ countries. In addition, the Bank offers tailored loan programmes,
          but the three above loan types receive the bulk of annual approvals. The Bank also has several trust funds
          and grant facilities with different donors and these finances are often allocated along with a Bank loan. To
          develop loans, the Bank offers extensive technical assistance services (see Bazbauers 2018 for a detailed
          history).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Harry Dexter White’s first IBRD draft went into detail about lending operations (Oliver 1971), which likely
          reflected his concern to ensure the exploitative lending of the inter-war years was not repeated. Further,
          White judged that the below-market interest rates on offer would produce a good demand for loans, which has
          not in fact generally been the case for the IBRD. The IDA, however, tends to be oversubscribed because of its
          highly concessional terms. Many of White’s ideas are inscribed in the Bank’s Articles of Agreement and into
          those of subsequent MDBs. Loan conditions are specified in Article III, Section 4 and they start with the
          requirement that states guarantee loan repayments made in their territory regardless of who it is to. Next,
          to make sure Bank funds did not compete with private banks, the IBRD had to be satisfied that the loan could
          not be secured from the market. Section 4 continues in outlining that loans and guarantees, except in special
          circumstances, must ‘be for the purpose of specific projects of reconstruction and development’ (World Bank
          2012). Further, interest rates must be ‘reasonable’ and, to ensure the productive use of loans, a ‘competent
          committee’ must study each proposal and complete a written report on it (Mason and Asher 1973). Debt was also
          a major concern of post-war planners, so the IBRD was tasked with making prudent assessments of the
          borrower’s capacity to repay. And, so, the aim was to create a cautious lending programme based on market
          ideals and framed by (Western) experts (Engel 2010).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Article 4, Point 10 of the IBRD’s establishing agreement on political non-interference gives ‘complete
          discretion’ for terms and conditions, meaning that an action is non-political if the Bank says it is (Mason
          and Asher 1973, 27). The artificial distinction between politics and economics in Point 10 has allowed the
          Bank to promote clearly political economic policies and prescriptions. Even loan conditions have been
          political, given that they grew with the rise of neoliberal SALs and SECALs in the 1980s and then declined in
          part because of their lack of efficacy.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Conditionality is the product of a three-way interaction between the Bank, shareholders, and borrowers, with
          more powerful borrowing countries being less subject to conditionality; influential shareholders only come
          into play if they have particular support for, or concerns about, loans to a borrower (Hernandez 2017). The
          availability of finance from other sources – the private sector and other donors – is also a factor shaping
          the level and impact of conditionality. Focussing on the availability from other states, Hernandez (2017)
          found that increased lending from China was associated with a decline in Bank conditionality on loans in 54
          African states. While Hernandez (2017) regards conditions positively as a way of increasing aid effectiveness
          and protecting resources, progressive scholars and NGOs have argued that they often undermine the state and
          harm the well-being of the poor (Bello 1994, Cammack 2002, Carroll 2010, SAPRIN 2004).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The World Bank’s terminology for loan conditions has changed over the decades, thus if you are reading loan
          documents available from the Bank’s project database, you might see terms like ‘pre-requisites,’ ‘policy
          action,’ ‘triggers,’ and ‘challenges.’ Conditions can be targeted at the macro- and mid-levels and the
          project level. <abbr>DPLs</abbr> focus on macro- and mid-level conditionality. In investment loans,
          conditions relate to the sector the loan is in. For example, the West Bengal Major Irrigation and Flood
          Management Project approved in 2019 called some of its conditions its ‘theory of change’ and included a
          condition of outsourcing operations and maintenance ‘to irrigation contractors on a performance basis’ (World
          Bank 2019, 7). This demonstrates the Bank’s commitment to private sector provision of public services funded
          by its loans. Investment loan conditions can have even broader implications for a sector, for example, a loan
          for a power plant in Vietnam required not only a private provider to build and operate the plant, but also
          legislation to promote the expansion of private providers in the sector, despite decades of problems in
          privatised electricity (Engel 2010).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Projects are evaluated by their expected rates of return, though the country’s overall <a class="item2"></a>creditworthiness is also a factor (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997, Urquidi 1996). As early as 1949,
          due in part to the low level and poor quality of loan applications, the Bank established a system of
          technical assistance to develop, assess, and supervise projects (Bazbauers 2018). It also assisted with
          broader state macroeconomic planning and management. Both were done with the assistance of ‘fly-in, fly-out’
          Western experts. Within two decades, the Bank had built four technical assistance pillars, a structure
          emulated by several other MDBs. These pillars included technical assistance embedded within projects to
          support implementation, stand-alone technical assistance project that often guided capacity development,
          survey missions that reviewed a recipient’s development status to propose future lending schedules, and
          professional training institutes delivering courses and seminars to senior public servants (Bazbauers 2018).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The World Bank requires projects to be managed in accordance with Bank-set accounting, auditing, and other
          standards, though in some ‘high-performing’ countries the Bank allows the use of local project management
          systems. All Bank loans are subject to social and environmental safeguards, though the efficacy of these has
          long been a matter of debate, with NGOs and academics pointing to limitations. The Bank also has policies
          around anti-corruption in project management and procurement. And, under pressure from the US, the Bank
          established an Inspection Panel in 1993 to allow people negatively affected by its projects a means of
          redress. As Park (2017) outlines, <a class="item2"></a>institutional isomorphism saw most of the other RDBs
          follow suit over the next decade.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In terms of procurement, the Articles of Agreement were ahead of their time in specifying that loans must be
          untied; tied aid requires recipients to spend aid in the donor country. Bilateral Western donors have made
          commitments since at least the late 1980s to progress the untying of their aid particularly for the least
          developed countries and low-income countries but have not yet fully achieved this. Still, formal untying of
          procurement from <a class="item2"></a>donor states can be misleading, as Bracking (2009) notes there is an
          expectation that the largest shareholders will be the largest beneficiaries of contracts from MDBs and other
          development finance institutions (<abbr>DFI</abbr>s). In the 1990s, the US, UK, Germany, Japan, and France
          were the largest beneficiaries of procurement in the World Bank (51.5% of total), <abbr>AsDB</abbr> (98.6%),
          and IADB (86.3%), though they only accounted for 20% of <abbr>AfDB</abbr> procurement (Bracking 2009, 119).
          By the mid-2000s, China and India had risen dramatically up the World Bank list, dominating in civil works
          contracts, and they were followed by Brazil as the next largest beneficiary. In consultancy contracts,
          Indonesia and the Russian Federation have joined the US, the UK, and France in the top five. Of course, the
          beneficiaries of winning contractors are not always clear in today’s globalised marketplace; contracts won by
          the Indonesian office of a global consultancy firm likely flow through tax havens to top income earners in
          the Global North.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The World Bank provides the framework for how project procurement should be undertaken and requires all
          Bank-financed work to be done by contractors and not the state. In terms of contracting out, in a small
          number of cases the Bank allows direct selection, essentially where there is only one suitable firm to
          provide the work or where there is a strong reason for a preferred firm. Most of the work, however, is put
          through open, competitive procurement. For small contracts, this may be limited to <a class="item2"></a>contractors in the borrower state, but the preferred mechanism is international competition. This
          requirement dates to loan agreements approved in 1951 (Mason and Asher 1973, 26). Competition for these
          contracts is complex and requires high-level technical and legal skills, access to technology and finance,
          and there is often a preference for larger companies that have the scale to complete complex projects
          (Bracking 2009). Many Western governments have long had special programmes to help their firms bid for
          projects and they utilise their in-country networks with government officials to benefit their companies; in
          other words, they adopt crony practices and North firms are not adverse to paying bribes to win projects. In
          practice, the lowest cost bid is not necessarily the best quality and once a company has won a contract
          through a low-cost bid, they can often negotiate further funding to complete it. International procurement
          also means that Global South countries are largely buying goods and services from places that are more
          developed than they are, either from the Global North or from a handful of large emerging economies like
          China, Brazil, and India. Thus, their debt repayments embody the labour costs – either directly in technical
          assistance or indirectly through the price of goods – of people paid more, often much more, than most workers
          in the poorest countries. In other words, MDB loans promote what Marxists label unequal exchange (Amin 2014).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Loan <a class="item2"></a>rates and charges vary in the World Bank dependent on the recipient country’s gross
          national income (GNI) per capita. Low-income countries (set as GNI below $1,025 in 2020) are eligible for IDA
          loans, which are highly concessional. Lower-middle income countries (GNI between $1,026 and $3,995 in 2010)
          can receive a blend of IBRD and IDA loans. Upper-middle income countries (GNI between $3,996 and $12,375) are
          eligible for IBRD loans only, which are on harder terms. As of April 2020, regular IDA loans had a maturity
          of 38 years, a six-year grace period where no repayments are made, and an interest rate of 3.125%; terms for
          small economies are slightly more generous, while for somewhat wealthier states eligible for a blend of IBRD
          and IDA loans, they are harder. The commitment charge for loans was zero. IBRD rates are a lot more variable
          depending on the term of the loan (8–20 years), the currency borrowed in, whether the loan was fixed or
          variable, and GNI per capita of the country. Interest rates are set in relation to the London Inter-Bank
          Offered Rate (LIBOR), which is an interest rate average determined from estimates given by major London
          banks. In April 2020, they ranged between <a class="item2"></a>LIBOR +0.65% and +2.05% and the loans had a
          front-end fee and commitment fee each of 0.25%.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Earlier in the chapter, we outlined the key factors shaping assessments of MDB <a class="item2"></a>creditworthiness, which determine how cheaply they can borrow and, in turn, on-lend for.
          Examining the IBRD, IADB, and <abbr>CAF</abbr>, Humphrey (2014) demonstrated that the IBRD can borrow most
          cheaply, followed by the IADB, which has a large US shareholding, while the <abbr>CAF</abbr> faces higher
          costs because its shareholders are regional states. But the different institutions have also taken different
          positions on net income, decisions about how much is used to build up reserves and equity (in lieu of
          increases in paid-in capital), and allocation of net income to alternate financing streams, in particular to
          technical assistance, trust funds, and concessional arms. <abbr>CAF</abbr> has focussed on minimising costs
          to borrowers, so its loans are not as expensive as would be expected given their cost of borrowing, while the
          IADB is closer to the World Bank in terms of interest rates (Humphrey 2014). The IBRD could lend more cheaply
          if it were not for these decisions.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">5.1.5 <a class="item6"></a><a class="item6"></a>Comparing the IBRD and other MDBs</h3>
<div class="item">
          Each of the above sections – voting rights, capital subscriptions, governance, and loans – has made some
          comparisons to other MDBs, demonstrating that many key features are shared among them. Delikanli, Dimitrov,
          and Agolli (2018, 112) regard the MDBs as ‘a family of peer cross-referenced institutions adhering to common
          norms and standards, with large MDBs often acting as role models.’ <a class="item2">Table 5.2</a>, however,
          provides a more systematic comparison of the IBRD to the regional, sub-regional, and specialised development
          banks.
        </div>
<table class="item8" width="98%">
<caption class="item9">
<a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 5.2</em> Key features of the structure of IBRD and variations in other MDBs</a>
</caption>
<thead class="item10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<th class="item11">Issue</th>
<th class="item11">IBRD</th>
<th class="item11">Variations in other MDBs</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="calibre10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Organisational Structure</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Structured like a company.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      For-profit.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Largest shareholders are non-borrowers.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Structured like the IBRD.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Can be non-profit, e.g., the EIB; specific profits must be re-invested, e.g., the
                      <abbr>CABEI</abbr>; or, have a special class of institutional shares that generate dividends,
                      e.g., the TDB.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Can be led by borrowers, non-borrowers, or some balance between them.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Membership</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      member states that must be IMF shareholders.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Can have non-IMF member states, other MDBs, and other financial institutions as members.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Smallest membership is five for the NDB.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Management</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Board of Governors representing all member states is supreme governing authority. They control
                      decisions requiring more than a majority vote and elect appointees to the Board of Directors.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Board of Directors is responsible for strategic direction and lending operation approval but, in
                      practice, Bank management has a lot of power. Originally 12 Executive Directors, now 25.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      All MDBs have the same basic structure.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, <abbr>CDB</abbr>, EBRD, and IADB
                      have resident Executive Directors, most others have non-resident ones.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Only the EIB has a larger number of Executive Directors than the World Bank; the average is
                      around 14 and the smallest five: the ETDB and NDB.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, <abbr>CAF</abbr>, and TDB have greater delegations to management for loan
                      approvals than the major MDBs. <abbr>AIIB</abbr> delegates decisions up to $300 million to
                      management, meaning little Board oversight.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The EIB has a Management Committee that comprised the President and Vice Presidents.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Shareholding and Voting</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Originally, shareholdings were to reflect relative size of economy globally, later contributions
                      to IDA became part of formula. There are still misalignments.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Shareholders get one vote for each share of stock held plus their basic votes; originally 250
                      basic votes but this was changed to 5.55% of all votes, though in practice it is less.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Executive Directors have the number of votes of the shareholders they represent and cannot split
                      their votes.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Largest shareholder is the US with 15.76% of votes.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
                The MDBs can have:

                <ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Higher or lower portions of basic votes, e.g., the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> has 20% basic votes.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Only votes per share, e.g. the NDB and EBRD.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Additional votes for founding members, e.g., the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> founding members get an
                      additional 600 votes each.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Voting power linked to whether countries are regional or non-regional members; regional members
                      generally must have the dominant shareholding, e.g., the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> regional membership
                      must be 60% minimum; the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> has the lowest voting share of regional members at
                      59%.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Shareholders may be limited to borrowing states; split between borrowing and non-borrowing
                      members (e.g., the <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> has 2% non-borrowing members, while the IADB’s Articles
                      specify equal split between borrowing and non-borrowing shareholdings); fully owned by
                      non-borrowers, e.g., the <abbr>BADEA</abbr> and OFID.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12"></td>
<td class="item12"></td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Equal shareholdings and votes for each member, the NDB has this and the <abbr>CABEI</abbr>
                      originally had this.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Groups of countries with equal votes, e.g., the IFAD has <abbr>DAC</abbr>, OPEC, and G77
                      groupings with equal votes.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Limits on all members maximum shareholding, e.g., the TDB has a 15% limit.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      One vote per Executive Director regardless of shareholding, e.g., the NIB.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Executive Directors can split votes in the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, and IsDB.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Voting Majorities</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Majority of weighted votes is required for most decisions. In practice, most votes are by
                      consensus but voting power shapes negotiations.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Double majority (majority of votes cast by member majority) for: suspension of members or
                      operations and distributions.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Super majority (75% of total voting power) for: increases in capital stock; currencies of
                      lending; approving securities that the Bank can purchase.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Super majority (60% of members with 85% of voting power) for: amendments to the Articles.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Unanimous agreement to modify clauses on the right to withdraw from Bank, rights to subscribe to
                      increases in authorised capital stock, and limits on liability.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Most MDBs have simple majority votes for regular decisions, though there are quite a few
                      exceptions where more than 51% is required (the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>CAF</abbr>, ETDB, and
                      IIB), while the NIB requires unanimity. Like the IBRD, practice tends to be by consensus.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Special majority is required for similar decisions as per the IBRD Articles, with most just
                      having one set of special majorities not the IBRD’s three. They generally require 66% of
                      Governors having 75% of voting power but there are variations.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">President and Staff</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Meant to be elected by the Executive Directors, but by informal agreement is selected by the US.
                      Reforms to create a more merit-based selection process have had limited impact.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      President is legal representative and chief executive officer with a five-year term and a maximum
                      of two terms.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Largest MDB with over 11,000 staff with around 60% in Washington, DC, headquarters and 40% in
                      resident missions.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Presidents are generally elected by Board of Governors and are often citizens of regional member
                      states.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Senior appointments tend to be political in most MDBs.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Five-year terms are common; second terms often allowed.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Largest staffing after the IBRD is the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> with just over 3,000. It also has a
                      relatively high percentage of its staff based at headquarters, whereas the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> have
                      over 40% of staff decentralised.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Location of Headquarters</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      In territory of largest member state. The US insisted on Washington, DC.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Headquarters is often linked to the distribution of regional institutions across member states.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      At least six located in non-borrowing countries.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The OFID is the only MDB with headquarters in a non-member state.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Capitalisation</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IBRD originally capitalised at $100 million, increased through GCIs and SCIs approved by
                      Board of Governors.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      In 2018, capitalised at $274.7 billion. 2018 Annual Meetings agreed to a further $60.1 billion
                      increase, making it again the largest MDB.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Originally 20% of IBRD capital was paid-in with the rest callable, of the paid-in 2% had to be
                      gold or hard currency like US dollars; now 6–7% of capital is paid-in.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IFC has 100% paid-in capital and the IDA around 75%.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Three other MDBs have subscribed capital over $100 billion – the EIB, IADB, and
                      <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. The <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is just below $100 billion.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Mid-tier MDBs have around $50 billion – the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, IsDB, and NDB. The EBRD has $30
                      billion.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Smaller MDBs have less than $10 billion. The smallest – the PIDB – has just over $8 million.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      MDBs often start with higher paid-in capital and it reduces over time as they gain
                      creditworthiness, e.g., the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> has 20% paid-in capital, RDBs had an average of 10%
                      in 2016, and SRDBs had an average of 44% in 2016; this high level increases their lending
                      capacity – the <abbr>CAF</abbr> had 68% paid-in capital and a high level of reserves.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Concessional Arm</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IDA was established in 1961, requires regular replenishments which are very political
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IBRD has transferred a share of profits to the IDA as did the IFC, but they stopped in 2018.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      From 2018, the IDA will raise funds on private markets.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The <abbr>AfDB</abbr> has the <abbr>AfDF</abbr> and NTF.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> has the <abbr>AsDF</abbr>, which merged its balance sheet into Ordinary
                      Capital Resources in 2015.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IADB has the FSO, which also merged in 2016.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IFAD is mostly funded by replenishments.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IsDB has the IsDF.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Focus on Lending</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      No political interference.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Finances projects that the private sector will not.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Instruments: investment and policy loans, credits, technical assistance, guarantees, and equity
                      investments.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Social and economic conditions.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Social and environmental safeguards supported by an independent evaluation office and an
                      Inspection Panel.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Outstanding loan portfolio in 2019: IBRD $192.8 billion; IDA $151.9 billion; Total $344.7
                      billion.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Loans average 2017–19:
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      IBRD: commitments $22.9 billion, gross disbursements $18.5 billion, and net disbursements $8.2
                      billion; IDA: commitments $21.8 billion, gross disbursements $14.9 billion, and net disbursements
                      $9.9 billion.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The EBRD promotes democracy.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Many MDBs promote regional integration.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Instruments: many have only investment and no policy lending, most offer equity investments but
                      only some offer lines of credit, grants, technical assistance, and guarantees.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Many MDBs have less or no conditionality, i.e., the IsDB has none.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Around half have some safeguards and, where they do, they tend to be similar and be supported by
                      an independent evaluation office and inspection panel.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The EIB has the largest outstanding loan portfolio at over $500 billion 2019 and $54 billion in
                      loan disbursements plus a further $11.5 billion for the EIF; the <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> as an example
                      of small MDB had $1.4 billion portfolio and $555 million in loan disbursements in 2019.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Most MDBs have top five borrowers that account for half of their outstanding loans (see Engen
                      &amp; Prizzon, 2018 for comparison of loan portfolios).
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Lending Terms</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      IBRD loans: variable depending on loan term (8–20 years), currency borrowed in, fixed or
                      variable, and GNI per capita of the country; interest rates between LIBOR +0.65 to +2.05%,
                      front-end fee and commitment fee each 0.25%.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      IDA loans: 38 years maturity, 6 years grace period, no commitment charge, interest rate 3.125%;
                      terms vary a little depending on borrower GNI.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Shorter and longer repayment periods and different interest rate regimes, e.g., revisable
                      interest rates.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Trade loans generally have shorter terms than investment loans.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      SRDBs interest rates are 130–40 basis points higher than the World Bank and RDBs.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Procurement</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Non-members states are eligible unconditionally to compete for contracts
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Bank specifies procurement standards as part of loans, though in some cases borrowers can utilise
                      their own systems.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Most MDBs allows non-members to compete but a few allow it on worse terms or not for special
                      funds.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The <abbr>CDB</abbr>, IADB, and IIB do not allow non-members to compete nor do the
                      <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and NDB though they have exceptions.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Smaller MDBs tend not to specify procurement procedures.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Other Arms</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IFC for private sector lending.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The MIGA for investment guarantees.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The ICSD for dispute settlement.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Most fund private sector (non-sovereign) operations from main entity but two have arms like the
                      IFC – the IADB and IsDB.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IsDB has an arm like the MIGA.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The EIB funds non-sovereign operations from its main entity but also has separate small and
                      medium enterprise arm and another arm a bit like the MIGA.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Other Services and Funds</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Funds and services for technical advice, trust funds.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Most MDBs provide technical assistance and see this as an area of comparative advantage.
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Some have trust funds, e.g., the EIB has technical assistance trust funds plus several facilities
                      to support private sector investment, public-private partnerships, and pre-investment studies.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Research and Training</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      The IBRD has a Research Division and the World Bank Institute (formerly the Economic Development
                      Institute), which funds research, partners with academia, and runs seminars and conferences
                      (Bazbauers, 2018).
                    </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Engen and Prizzon (2018) calculated that the Bank produced over 22,000 research papers since
                      2000.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td class="item12">
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
                      Only the larger MDBs have research units and only a few have training units, e.g., the EIB
                      Institute, IsDB’s Islamic Research and Training Institute, and the African and Asian Development
                      Bank Institutes.
                    </div>
</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<div class="source">
          Sources: MDB Websites and Annual Reports and Engen and Prizzon (2018), Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli
          (2018), Griffith-Jones (2001), Humphrey (2019)
        </div>
</section>
</div>

<br/></div>