<div class="delete">

<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">2.3 Conclusion</h2>
<div class="item">
        This chapter demonstrated that MDF was a logical step in the evolution of state borrowing initially for war and
        later for development. Debt from complex but largely unregulated private finance produced instability that
        Western democratic states could not tolerate and, at the same time, an overall dearth of financial flows to
        newly independent states. The dire impacts of the boom and bust cycles of international finance produced
        domestic and international forces promoting control and regulation but it was incomplete. Indeed, the very
        mechanisms created to facilitate flows to developing countries have created instabilities as there are few or
        no mechanisms to ensure public and particularly private debt is created for useful purposes by representative,
        effective regimes.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Some of the tensions embodied in MDF derive from its origins. State lending to other states has always been
        fraught and war credits often fed into post-war instability. The debates about economic cooperation by the
        League of Nations after the <a class="item2"></a>First World War led to the first proposals for institution
        building in this area and the creation of the <abbr>BIS</abbr>. However, the first formal development finance
        institutions were export-import banks, dating back to 1919 and they were designed with the developmental
        interests of the already industrialised world in play. The US Treasury was aware in the 1930s that Exim banks
        created political tensions (Oliver 1971). Nevertheless, the US Exim Bank came to provide something like
        concessional development finance to Latin America during the 1930s, assisted by concerns in the US Congress
        about the <a class="item2"></a>rising popularity and influence of Nazi Germany in the region. The <a class="item2"></a>US Treasury was also acutely aware of the failures of private institutions to provide adequate
        credit to developing regions, let alone ones at reasonable interest rates and for well-researched projects,
        which were likely to promote development and progress.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        It seems clear that the first proposal for a regional body to provide MDF came from Mexico and not the US.
        Mexico, at the time, was pursuing a fairly radical economic nationalist developmental policy and actively
        sought to represent and promote the interest of poorer states (Thornton 2017). Given the relative
        progressiveness of the Roosevelt Administration and the concerns about the <a class="item2"></a>rise of Nazism,
        they supported the idea and helped develop a proposal for the IAB. The IAB ‘combined the functions of (a) an
        investment bank; (b) an international stabilization fund with some Central Bank powers; (c) an ordinary
        commercial bank, and (d) a centre of technical and economic research to promote economic development’
        (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010, 39). In other words, it had broader <a class="item2"></a>functions than the
        subsequent proposals for the IMF and IBRD at Bretton Woods. These origins support Helleiner’s (2014, 2017)
        recent accounts of Bretton Woods as having a greater developmental focus than has been presented in the
        histories of the World Bank to date. What Helleiner perhaps misses are that in structuring these organisations
        as banks – bound up with, and indeed reliant on, the international banking sector and money markets – the
        institutional structures created would prioritise banking needs not developmental ones. White thought that the
        institution’s disinterested analysis of projects would be enough to differentiate it from older forms of
        finance capital. He said:
      </div>
<blockquote class="item13">
<div class="quote">
          In the past movement of capital have been regarded as, frankly, imperialist. They usually led later to
          difficulties of one sort or another. The other country did not like to pay; the interests built up were
          frequently supposed to be tyrannous. We are still liquidating many of the nineteenth-century messes which
          were occasioned by the <em class="calibre4">somewhat violent and not too enlightened motives of capital</em>.
        </div>
<footer class="item14">
          (White cited in Oliver 1975, 97, emphasis added)
        </footer>
</blockquote>
<div class="item">
        Yet MDBs have not overcome the violence of capital, rather, as Graeber (2014) argued, debt <a class="item2"></a>as violence continued and has only been partially hidden by the impersonal structures of the modern
        state system and capitalism. Structural features were more influential in shaping the IBRD and MDF than the, at
        times, progressive aspirations of its founders to a <a class="item2"></a>‘New Deal in international economics’
        whose goals included supplying ‘the huge volume of capital that will be needed abroad for… the attainment of
        world prosperity and higher standards of living’ (Memo to Roosevelt quoted in Helleiner 2017, 28). State-backed
        MDF still remains subject to cycles of credit expansion followed by crisis. The repayment imperative sees basic
        services cut to the poor to pay back debt. Across the world, austerity policies result in increased disease and
        death, but such cuts disproportionately impact the poor in the Global South.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The MDF system was designed to ensure that debts were used productively but it did not include any mechanism
        for dealing ‘expediently and humanely with a bankrupt government’ (Soederberg 2006, 96–7). The IMF was focussed
        on currency stability and convertibility and short-term loans to countries facing balance of payments crises.
        This latter topic, along with increased surveillance of states, became its main focus after the end of the
        Bretton Wood <a class="item2"></a>mark I system, as the period from their establishment to the demise of the
        gold standard in 1971 and fixed exchange rates in 1973 is sometimes called. Neoliberal conditionality grew too
        with lending. The Bretton Woods twins have guaranteed repayment and both organisations are arbiters of country
        creditworthiness. Both also act as <em class="calibre4">de facto</em> global debt collectors and not always, or indeed often, in
        humane ways (Soederberg 2006). For example, in the case of the Argentine default in 2001, even after the
        country reached a deal with its creditors, a small number of private investors defied the agreement buying up
        defaulted debt at cheap prices and suing the Argentine government through US courts to get a better deal on the
        debt. An agreement was only reached in late 2016 and the precedent set by the holdouts was a major setback for
        effective restructurings (Stiglitz 2013).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        It is fascinating that today’s emerging powers, in particular China, are largely following the patterns of
        credit creation established from the 1930s. China’s development finance started through its export-import bank
        and national policy banks and, as the political costs of this system of tied aid started to become too high,
        they established their own MDB, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>. It is not entirely surprising that a state-led economy
        like China would find comfort in the Keynesian ideas that dominated when the first MDBs were proposed and
        created, namely, that ‘[p]rivate investors cannot be counted on to finance world-wide economic development in
        the absence of government guarantees to reduce the risk of overseas lending’ (Oliver 1975, 62). But the fact is
        that the record of MDBs in creating economic development has not been overwhelming yet the system of MDBs
        continues to expand.
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">Note</h2>
<ol class="none">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="endnote">
<a class="item2">1</a> This analysis draws quite a bit on Mikesell (1966). He outlined four direct
            precedents for the emergence of the IBRD: first, the growth of private finance and lending; second, war
            loans, third, international monetary cooperation; and, finally, the establishment of export-import banks.
            However, he does not discuss the proposal for an Inter-American Bank, which is the key precedent for the
            IBRD.
          </div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>
<ol class="biblioentrylist">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Ahamed, Liaquat. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Lords of Finance: The Bankers Who Broke the World</em>. New York: Penguin Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Arrighi, Giovanni. 1994. <em class="calibre4">The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the Origins of Our Times</em>.
            London: Verso.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bieler, Andreas, and Adam David Morton. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Global Capitalism, Global War, Global Crisis</em>.
            Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Block, Fred L. 1977. <em class="calibre4">The Origins of International Economic Disorder: A Study of United States
            International Monetary Policy from World War II to the Present</em>. Berkeley: University of California
            Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bracking, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Money and Power: Great Predators in the Political Economy of Development</em>.
            London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cammack, Paul. 2004. “What the World Bank Means by Poverty Reduction and Why it Matters.” <em class="calibre4">New Political
            Economy</em> 9 (2):189–211.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Collado, Emilio. 1974. <em class="calibre4">Oral History Interview with Emilio Collado</em>, edited by Richard D. McKinzie.
            Truman Library. Accessed 8 November 2018. <a class="item2" href="https://trumanlibrary.org">https://trumanlibrary.org/oralhist/collado2.htm</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kimball, Warren. 2003. “Lend-Lease.” In <em class="calibre4">The Oxford Companion to World War II</em>, edited by I.C.B.
            Dear and M.R.D. Foot. Oxford: Oxford University Press, online.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Diaz-Bonilla, Eugenio, and Maria Victoria del Campo. 2010. <em class="calibre4">A Long and Winding Road: The Creation of the
            Inter American Development Bank</em>. Australia: Lulu.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Eichengreen, Barry. 1991. “Historical Research on International Lending and Debt.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Economic
            Perspectives</em> 5 (2):149–69.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan. 2010. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in Vietnam and Indonesia:
            Inheritance of Loss</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Federal Reserve Bulletin. 1940. Inter-American Bank, edited by Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
            Washington, DC.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gardner, Richard N. 1980. <em class="calibre4">Sterling-dollar Diplomacy in Current Perspective: The Origins and the
            Prospects of our International Economic Order</em>, 3rd ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Geisst, Charles R. 2013. <em class="calibre4">Beggar Thy Neighbor: A History of Usury and Debt</em>. Philadelphia:
            University of Pennsylvania Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Graeber, David. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Debt: The First 5,000 Years</em>. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Helleiner, Eric. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Forgotten Foundations of Bretton Woods: International Development and the Making
            of the Postwar Order</em>. Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Helleiner, Eric. 2017. “What’s Been Missing from Conventional Histories of Bretton Woods?” In <em class="calibre4">Global
            Perspectives on the Bretton Woods Conference and the Post-War World Order</em>, edited by Giles Scott-Smith
            and J. Simon Rofe, 17–34. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Hobsbawm, Eric. 1999. <em class="calibre4">Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century 1914–1991</em>. London: Abacus.
            Original edition, 1994.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Hobson, C. K. 1914. <em class="calibre4">The Export of Capital</em>. London: Constable and Company Ltd.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Ikenberry, G. John. 1992. “A World Economy Restored: Expert Consensus and the Anglo-American Postwar
            Settlement.” <em class="calibre4">International Organization</em> 46 (1):289–321.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kennedy, Paul. 1989. <em class="calibre4">The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from
            1500 to 2000</em>. New York: Vintage Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kindleberger, Charles P. 1984. <em class="calibre4">A Financial History of Western Europe</em>. London: George Allen &amp;
            Unwin.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mazower, Mark. 2012. <em class="calibre4">Governing the World: The History of an Idea, 1815 to the Present</em>. New York:
            Penguin Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Meade, James. 1975. “The Keynesian Revolution.” In <em class="calibre4">Essays on John Maynard Keynes</em>, edited by Milo
            Keynes, 82–88. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mikesell, Raymond F. 1966. <em class="calibre4">Public International Lending for Development</em>. New York: Random House.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Oliver, Robert W. 1971. <em class="calibre4">Early Plans for a World Bank, Princeton Studies in International Finance No.
            29</em>. Princeton, NJ: Department of Economics, Princeton University.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Oliver, Robert W. 1975. <em class="calibre4">International Economic Co-operation and the World Bank</em>. London and
            Basingstoke: Macmillan Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Pieterse, Jan Nederveen. 2011. “Global Rebalancing: Crisis and the East-South Turn.” <em class="calibre4">Development and
            Change</em> 42 (1):61–79.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Rohrer, Finlo. 2006. “What’s a Little Debt between Friends?” <em class="calibre4">BBC News Magazine</em>. Accessed 28
            February 2018. <a class="item2" href="http://news.bbc.co.uk">http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/magazine/4757181.stm</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1934. Executive Order 6581 Creating the Export-Import Bank of Washington. The
            American Presidency Project.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Scammell, W. M. 1983. <em class="calibre4">The International Economy Since 1945</em>, 2nd ed. London: Macmillan Education
            Ltd.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Scott-Smith, Giles, and J. Simon Rofe, eds. 2017. <em class="calibre4">Global Perspectives on the Bretton Woods Conference
            and the Post-War World Order</em>. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Soederberg, Susan. 2006. <em class="calibre4">Global Governance in Question: Empire, Class and the New Common Sense in
            Managing North-South Relations</em>. London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Stasavage, David. 2016. “What We Can Learn from the Early History of Sovereign Debt.” <em class="calibre4">Explorations in
            Economic History</em> 59:1–16. doi: 10.1016/j.eeh.2015.09.005.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Stiglitz, Joesph. 2013. “The Vultures’ Victory.” <em class="calibre4">Project Syndicate</em>, September 4.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Thornton, Christy. 2017. “Voice and Vote for the Weaker Nations: Mexico’s Bretton Woods.” In <em class="calibre4">Global
            Perspectives on the Bretton Woods Conference and the Post-War World Order</em>, edited by Giles Scott-Smith
            and J. Simon Rofe, 149–65. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Toussaint, Eric. 2019. <em class="calibre4">The Debt System: A History of Sovereign Debts and Their Repudiation</em>.
            Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Van Dormael, Armand. 1978. <em class="calibre4">Bretton Woods: Birth of a Monetary System</em>. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Villaseñor, Eduardo. 1941. “The Inter-American Bank: Prospects and Dangers.” <em class="calibre4">Foreign Affairs</em> 20
            (1):165–74.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Woods, Ngaire. 1999. “Good Governance in International Organizations.” <em class="calibre4">Global Governance</em> 5
            (1):39–61.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2012. International Bank of Reconstruction and Development Articles of Agreement. Washington,
            DC: World Bank. Accessed 24 November 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.worldbank.org">https://www.worldbank.org/en/about/articles-of-agreement/ibrd-articles-of-agreement</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wynne, William Harris. 1951. <em class="calibre4">State Insolvency and Foreign Bondholders Vol II: Selected Case Histories
            of Governmental Foreign Bond Defaults and Debt Readjustments</em>. Washington, DC: Beard Books.
          </div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<h1 class="toc"><a class="item2" href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter3">3 Development thinking, debt, and the
    multilateral development bank system: 1946–79</a></h1>
<div class="item">
      This chapter is the first of two chapters exploring the emergence of development ideas and how they link to (i)
      the advent of the MDB system and (ii) <a class="item2"></a>development in practice. <a class="item2">Chapter
      3</a> explores the period from the start of the Bretton Woods system at the end of the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War until the late 1970s, three decades through which the post-war Keynesian consensus
      melded with welfare state and modernisation model to dominate economic thinking (Fine 2001). It was also the
      largest period of MDB creation with 22 organisations established. The chapter pays special attention to the
      founding of the first MDB – the World Bank – as it provided the model for future development banks. Thus, this
      chapter begins with a brief outline of the Bank set within the context of the emergence of development thought.
      The second section of the chapter explores the impact of regionalism and the United Nations (UN) on the expansion
      of the MDB system, outlining how the marginalisation of the UN in favour of the MDBs profoundly shaped
      development practice and more. The third section explores the sub-regional expansion of the MDB system, while the
      final section returns to the issue of debt, which rapidly expanded in the 1970s laying the foundations for the
      so-called 1982 Third World <a class="item2"></a>Debt Crisis.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      As <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a> outlined, the theoretical tradition that most influenced the Bretton Woods
      institutions was Keynesianism. Keynes’ (1973) work was aimed at saving capitalism from its tendency to crisis as
      well as ensuring high levels of employment and reasonable standards of living for all; he aimed to make
      capitalism work more effectively. Keynes argued that <a class="item2"></a>capitalism tended to boom and bust
      cycles and that contra neoclassical economics, there was no automatic system for adjustment rather government
      intervention was needed (Galbraith 1975, Roll 1973). Keynes also saw the need for international <a class="item2"></a>economic cooperation as these same forces were at work globally and coordination was vital,
      especially during crises. Indeed, he was a key participant at the July 1944 <a class="item2"></a>Bretton Woods
      Conference that created the World Bank. Keynesianism fed into the establishment of <a class="item2"></a>development economics in the 1940s and 1950s and helped consolidate the idea that the state was a key
      means to organise society and promote development (Berger 2004). Keynes’ work also reflected changes that had
      already been taking place in many industrialised states, where the role and reach of the state was expanding.
      This has been called a revolution in practical governmental policy, and Meade (1975, 87) argues this was ‘of much
      greater importance and significance for the welfare of mankind’ than the revolution in macroeconomics produced by
      <a class="item2"></a>Keynesianism.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      After the Second World War, influenced by Keynesianism, development thought was not particularly ideological, it
      was not ‘left’ or ‘right,’ rather there was general consensus that more government intervention was needed than
      previously (Rapley 2002). Other key influences on development thinking were Modernisation Theory, with its focus
      on emulating the political and social systems of the West, and Growth Theory, which focussed on expanding capital
      formation from savings and investments as crucial to accelerating economic growth. Fine (2001) usefully labelled
      the post-war consensus as the Keynesian, welfare, modernisation model. This was the general milieu as the
      <a class="item2"></a>World Bank was established – development studies and development economics were in their
      infancy and thinking focussed on a greater role for the state through planning. <a class="item2"></a>Statism,
      <a class="item2"></a>Modernisation Theory, and <a class="item2"></a>Growth Theory all saw debt as a useful way
      the state could obtain the capital necessary for investment and ‘take-off,’ though <a class="item2"></a>Structuralism and Dependency Theory would challenge many of these ideas.
    </div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">3.1 The World Bank: a brief introduction</h2>
<div class="item">
        The World Bank commenced operations in 1946 as the IBRD but later grew into the World Bank Group, which today
        has five institutions: IBRD, International Finance Corporation (IFC) added in 1956, IDA in 1960, International
        Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (<a class="item2"></a>ICSID) in 1966, and Multilateral
        Investment Guarantee Agency (<a class="item2"></a>MIGA) in 1988. Given that this book studies MDF, we focus on
        the Bank’s MDF arms: the IBRD, IDA, and IFC. As per World Bank Group usage, the term ‘World Bank’ refers to the
        <a class="item2"></a>IBRD and the concessional lending arm, the <a class="item2"></a>IDA, which have different
        Articles of Agreement but share the same staff and headquarters. In contrast, the <a class="item2"></a>IFC
        invests purely in private enterprises via loans and guarantees and provides risk management and advisory
        services. The Bank is the largest development agency in the world with over 12,000 staff and 5,000 contractors
        in 2019. After a large capital increase agreed to in 2018, its total capital base is $312.9 billion, meaning
        that surpassed even the European Investment Bank (<a class="item2"></a>EIB) which has $275 billion in capital.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Most historical accounts of the World Bank largely present it as the product of <a class="item2"></a>Anglo-American negotiations. As outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a>, however, its origins
        are more complex than that, with proposals for international economic cooperation dating to the 1800s. The
        story of the <a class="item2"></a>Bretton Woods Conference, where the final details of the IMF and Bank were
        negotiated, has been told often and very well (see inter alia Block 1977, Gardner 1980, Oliver 1971) and hence
        is not retold here. Overall, Bretton Woods gave the IMF responsibility for promoting an orderly exchange rates
        system, providing short-term assistance to nations facing balance of payment crises and undertaking
        surveillance of global economic conditions. Of course, its role in the <a class="item2"></a>exchange rate
        system changed dramatically in the early 1970s with the end of the gold standard and the shift to floating
        exchange rates. The Bank was to provide long-term loans to promote <a class="item2"></a>reconstruction and
        development. As <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a> outlines, both <a class="item2"></a>institutions reflected the
        growing belief in the importance of international organisation, and they had <a class="item2"></a>Keynesian
        social democratic aims. The Bank’s primary architect, Harry Dexter White, intended the IBRD as an alternative
        to private banks, which had been too exploitative and crisis prone (Oliver 1975). But, like most things, the
        devil is in the detail and in setting up the IBRD as a bank, White created an institution that would
        institutionalise banking norms more than human development goals. Other MDBs largely followed the model framed
        by the Bank, with their structures outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a>. Still, the Keynesian ideals that
        imbued the Bank’s creation remain an important influence on the institution and subsequent MDBs, often most
        visible in their purposes, one focus of this chapter.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Analyses of Bretton Woods have tended to argue that reconstruction was at the forefront of White’s mind in
        establishing the IBRD (e.g., Oliver 1971). In fact, White also had a strong focus on development and the Latin
        American delegations – and Mexico’s representatives in particular – ensured that development was higher on the
        Bank’s agenda than would have otherwise been the case (Helleiner 2017, 2014, Urquidi 1996). US bureaucrats did
        use the funding of reconstruction as a way of selling the Bank to Congress (Gardner 1980) and most of the other
        large shareholders were engrossed by concerns with reconstruction and the Bank’s early loans reflected this
        (Mason and Asher 1973).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The IBRD’s main aim is <a class="item2"></a>facilitating investment ‘for productive purposes,’ promoting
        private foreign investment, and promoting ‘long-range balanced growth,’ productivity, and standards of living
        (World Bank 2012, 3). The MDB was designed to help capitalism function more effectively and in a socially
        acceptable manner. In line with the Keynesian project, growth was important not just for its own sake but for
        its impact on employment (Engel 2010). The <a class="item2"></a><a class="item2"></a>Great Depression had
        demonstrated that the international economy would not, under its own momentum, provide investment at a level
        that would achieve near full employment. Once operational though, the Bank understood development as the
        expansion of <a class="item2"></a>capitalism. But as Amin (2014, 14) has argued, ‘[c]apitalism is not “a system
        of development”,’ rather it is about the expansion of capital and private property. The Bank demonstrates this
        point in the way that it has sidelined some of its purposes, including balanced trade and national accounts,
        standards of living, and employment. To illustrate, the Bank for years claimed that its prohibition on
        political activity prevented it from promoting the <a class="item2"></a>International Labour Organisation’s
        Core Labour Standards (Murphy 2014) despite the fact that among its purposes is the promote of the ‘conditions
        of labour’.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The focus on private investment, private markets for capital, and guaranteeing private loans was a key
        contribution of the European delegations at Bretton Woods. As the Bank’s first official history noted, it ‘was
        all but the universal expectation of the founders of the Bank that its primary function would be to guarantee
        private investments’ (Mason and Asher 1973, 26). In practice, it focussed on direct lending to states. The
        clause on <a class="item2"></a>private investment also highlights how economic logic dominated Bretton Woods
        thinking which has ‘colored the Bank’s development efforts’ ever since, as the Bank’s second official history
        pointed out (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997, 70). The purposes demonstrate belief in planning and management by
        experts, noting the need for prioritising ‘useful and urgent projects’ (World Bank 2012, 3). Finally, the
        clause highlighting ‘the effect of international investment on business conditions’ (World Bank 2012, 3)
        offered a limited promise of counter-cyclical investment on both a country and a world scale, a Keynesian view.
        This is an area where it rarely engaged up until the 2007–8 GFC.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        In terms of what investments should be prioritised, the <a class="item2"></a>World Bank sets the agenda and
        continues to play a leading, indeed often hegemonic, role in shaping the development practices of other MDBs.
        Founding senior IBRD staff held that manufacturing and export industries should be funded by private investors,
        so they were excluded as was investment in state-run enterprises, other than utilities. The consensus that
        dominated <a class="item2"></a>IBRD lending for more than a decade was that public utilities – in particular
        electricity, dams, transport, and communications – provided the preconditions to economic growth and the
        expansion of private investment (Mason and Asher 1973). As Toussaint (2008) points out, in its first 17 years
        the Bank did not lend at all for education, health, drinking water, or wastewater treatment and certainly not
        for welfare. Bank staffers felt their contribution to economic growth was ‘less measurable and direct than that
        of power plants’ (Mason and Asher 1973, 151) though it is now clear that this is the most direct way to improve
        human well-being.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        In its early years, the Bank made several loans to colonial powers to finance projects in colonies in direct
        contravention of the UN’s commitment to self-determination (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). Once independent,
        former colonies were required to take over Bank debts contracted by former colonial entities regardless of how
        odious they were (Toussaint 2008). Further, a key loan condition from its earliest operations has been
        settlement of outstanding debts, making the Bank a debt collector enforcing a <a class="item2"></a>capitalist
        hegemonic principle. <a class="item2">Table 3.1</a> outlines the main contributions of Bank Presidents until
        1981.
      </div>
<table class="item8" width="98%">
<caption class="item9">
<a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 3.1</em> World Bank Presidents 1946–81</a>
</caption>
<thead class="item10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<th class="item11">Name and Term</th>
<th class="item11">Background</th>
<th class="item11">Legacy</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="calibre10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Eugene Meyer June–Dec 1946</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended Yale University, wealthy banker, served in several government
            offices, owned Washington Post.</td>
<td class="item12">Recruited senior staff, mostly bankers. Laid some of the groundwork for the Bank,
            especially loan analysis backed by a research department. Adopted a conservative approach to gain Wall
            Street’s confidence. Clashed with Executive Directors over authority.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">John McCloy 1947–9</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended Harvard University, trained as lawyer, served Assistant Secretary
            of War during World War II.</td>
<td class="item12">Accepted presidency on the basis that he would have strong executive authority relative
            to the Board of Executive Directors. Obtained funds from capital markets and to do so demonstrated ‘sound’
            (read conservative) lending and staffing policies. Established the interest rate policy and negative pledge
            – that no other creditor would take precedence over the IBRD – and policy of not lending to countries that
            had not tried hard to settle on any defaults to other creditors. Started the shift from reconstruction to
            development financing.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Name and Term</td>
<td class="item12">Background</td>
<td class="item12">Legacy</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Eugene Robert Black 1949–62</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended University of Georgia, served in US Navy, worked as investment firm
            banker, saw himself as a development diplomat.</td>
<td class="item12">Built up the foundations of the Bank started by McCloy in terms of loan development,
            staffing, management, and access to US credit markets to raise capital. Emphasised conservative banking
            principles. Focused on projects that align with strong national development plans and launched the Bank’s
            technical assistance program. Promoted a vision of development as modernisation and advocated the role of
            private sector finance, leading to the creation of the IFC in 1956. The concessional loan affiliate, the
            IDA, was established in the Bank in 1961, although he originally rejected the idea. Popular with Bank
            staff.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">George David Woods 1963–8</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, office worker at bond firm, investment banker.</td>
<td class="item12">Viewed the Bank as a development institution rather than just a bank. He expanded
            lending and introduced program loans and established the Bank’s role in aid coordination and strengthened
            the IFC. Woods expanded research from country creditworthiness to a more comprehensive assessment and
            expanded economic staff. He shifted focus from large-scale investment to agriculture productivity,
            education, and population growth. To allay investor fears about private investments, he established ICSID
            in 1966. Decolonisation saw membership increase by one third.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Robert Strange McNamara 1968–81</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended University of California and Harvard Business School, introduced
            quantitative management to US car industry, served as US Secretary of Defence, responsible for the Vietnam
            War strategy that analysed success by the number of enemy dead.</td>
<td class="item12">One of the most influential and transformative Bank Presidents and a spokesperson for
            developing countries. He applied his quantitative managerial program to achieving Bank expansion in lending
            volume, geographical reach and staffing, and diversifying sources of finance. Lending expansion came at the
            expense of quality. McNamara focused the Bank on inequality and poverty, basic needs, education, and rural
            development especially for smallholders. Strengthened aid coordination and research capacity. Successful in
            substantially increasing IDA replenishments through political lobbying. Responded to the OPEC oil crisis by
            expanding lending and introducing structural adjustment late in his term.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<div class="source">
        Source: Compiled by authors from a range of sources, basic details from World Bank website (2019).
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">3.2 The <a class="item6"></a>expansion of the MDB system: the role of the UN and <a class="item6"></a>regional politics</h2>
<div class="item">
        The World Bank’s shift to <a class="item2"></a>lending to developing countries occurred in the context of early
        <a class="item2"></a>Cold War hysteria. Despite the Cold War, many newly independent countries were assertive
        about their developmental needs and they were motivated by the success of the Marshall Plan. They focussed on
        the need for external capital for the development and were concerned that continued reliance on primary
        products exports would lead to under-development. This latter concern was empirically demonstrated by the work
        of Raúl Prebisch (1950) and Hans Singer (1950), whose separately published work on <a class="item2"></a>First-Third World trade, titled the Prebisch-Singer thesis, showed that the price of primary
        commodities, the main exports of developing countries, was declining relative to the price of manufactured
        exports from the First World. The declining terms of trade meant <a class="item2"></a>Third World countries
        would either need to export more and more primary commodities, change the structure of production in their
        economies, or live with increasing under-development. Faced with this dilemma, developing countries made a
        revolutionary push for soft finance to be provided through the UN and not the IBRD (Shaw 2005). The call was
        originally made by the Indian economist Dr. V.K.R.V. Rao in 1949 and was championed in developing countries and
        by Singer over the next decade. In 1952, the proposal was labelled the Special United Nations Fund for Economic
        Development (SUNFED) and it provided the core ideas for what became the IDA. SUNFED was to provide highly
        concessional loans and grants and be replenished regularly (Shaw 2005). The World Bank originally opposed the
        idea, in particular low-interest, long-term loans, as it perceived such loans would reduce the creditworthiness
        of borrowers (Mason and Asher 1973, 389–90).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The US was also opposed to SUNFED and little happened in IOs in these years without their imprimatur. US
        initial aid efforts focussed on technical assistance and Congress was very hostile to proposals for grant aid,
        indeed isolationist elements opposed any expansion of aid (Engerman 2018). The growth of MDF was an attractive
        alternative to grant aid and US President Truman’s famous Four Points Speech in 1949 opened the door for its
        further expansion (Peet 2003). Still, it took some time to convince Congress of this and an idea from a State
        Department official for an <a class="item2"></a>Asian Development Fund went by the wayside in 1955 (Engerman
        2018). This was despite the famous <a class="item2"></a>Asian-African Conference taking place in Bandung in
        April 1955, where 29 Afro-Asian states met to promote economic and cultural cooperation and to oppose
        colonialism and neo<a class="item2"></a>colonialism; the <a class="item2"></a>Bandung Conference was a key step
        in the creation of the Non-Aligned Movement (<a class="item2"></a>NAM) in 1961.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The World Bank was focussed on expanding support for the private sector. President Eugene Black proposed the
        <a class="item2"></a>establishment of the IFC as a sibling to the IBRD, to fill a supposed void in <a class="item2"></a>private sector lending. The US originally opposed its establishment too, but reversed this as a way
        of being seen to respond to the <a class="item2"></a>SUNFED calls (Mason and Asher 1973, Shaw 2005). Thus, the
        IFC was established in 1956 ‘to further economic development by encouraging the growth of productive private
        enterprise in member countries, particularly in the less developed areas, supplementing’ IBRD activities (IFC
        2012). The US shift was influenced by Cold War concerns too, which is clear from the fact that it created its
        own <a class="item2"></a>Development Loan Fund in 1957 under the <a class="item2"></a>Mutual Security Act aimed
        at strengthening ‘friendly foreign countries’ through ‘competitive free enterprise’ (United States Committee on
        Government Operations 1960, 6).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Other MDBs started to appear at this time. The Council of Europe Development Bank (<abbr>CEB</abbr>) (1956) and
        EIB (1958) were established without US involvement and are both borrower-led banks in contrast to the IBRD.
        They were early attempts to create a regional European bloc, as well as rebuild and strengthen Western Europe
        following the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War and during the early Cold War years (Bussière and Willaert
        2006, Griffith-Jones and Tyson 2013). The <a class="item2"></a><abbr>CEB</abbr> is a specialised development
        bank and it initially focussed on the welfare element of the Keynesian, welfare, modernisation model. Its
        social mandate aimed to help solve Europe’s problems focussing on the impact of refugees and displaced peoples.
        It established the idea of both a regional and specialised focus for the MDBs, demonstrating that MDBs could
        engage with social issues, something the IBRD had avoided. The EIB followed in 1958, established by the
        <a class="item2"></a>Treaty of Rome as part of the European integration project. It aimed to build a common
        market, facilitate European integration, and promote balanced growth, which set the region-building tone of the
        RDBs and returned to a modernisation, economic focus. Still, Keynesian social elements continued with its focus
        on ‘balanced and steady development’ (European Union 2002, 139). It claims not to be an MDB, but its structure
        and functions are so similar that we think that it doth protest too much (see <a class="item2">Chapter 6</a>).
        The <a class="item2"></a>EIB’s focus on <a class="item2"></a>region-building – it prioritises funding to
        ‘projects of common interest to several Member States’ (European Union 2002, 140) – was explicitly replicated
        in later regional and sub-regional banks (see <a class="item2">Chapters 6</a> and <a class="item2">7</a>). It
        was also the first MDB to specify that it is not-for-profit, in contrast to the IBRD being formally a
        profit-making institution and other MDBs being a mix.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Next came the US-backed IADB, established in 1959. As noted in <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a>, the early ideas
        for an inter-American bank pre-date the IBRD, although formal negotiations fell through. It was resurrected in
        the post-war era by the 1957 <a class="item2"></a>Economic Conference of the Organisation of American States.
        By 1958, the US supported the proposal, first and foremost because the US was concerned that the Cold War was
        impacting its zone of influence (Tussie 1995). Further, as discussed in more depth in <a class="item2">Chapter
        6</a>, the IADB was seen as a counterweight to the IBRD’s rather monopolistic position (Phillips 2009) and as a
        response to the Bank’s perceived inadequate attention to Latin America and regional interests in integration
        (Barria and Roper 2004, Krasner 1981, Tussie 1995).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The IADB started a new approach to the purposes of the MDBs, moving away from the IBRD’s mandate of
        facilitating investment for productive purposes and promoting private investment to the broader goal of
        contributing ‘to the acceleration of the process of economic and social development of the regional developing
        country members, individually and collectively’ (IaDB 1996, 5). While this could be seen as broadly Keynesian,
        it also reflects the impact of structuralist and statist development ideas that came out of the UN’s Economic
        Commission for Latin America (<a class="item2"></a>UN-ECLA), which were popular in the region (Tussie 1995).
        Indeed, it had more flexibility to direct loans to the private sector than the World Bank (Humphrey 2016). This
        follows the strategy of import substitution industrialisation (ISI), which was the main way structuralism was
        operationalised to change the structure of production and avoid under-development (Rapley 2002). ISI was a key
        strategy in Latin America from the 1930s and was adopted by many newly independent states after the Second
        World War as well.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Although conforming to the IBRD’s <a class="item2"></a>banking model, the IADB was established with a
        concessional lending arm, the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). This indicated that it was possible to combine
        hard-nose banking functions with a social agenda. While Latin American states had a majority of votes in the
        main body, the US demanded a veto over <a class="item2"></a>FSO operations and insisted that the IADB be
        headquartered in Washington, DC (Humphrey 2016), demonstrating again the impact of geopolitics on MDBs.
        Technical assistance is included in the IADB’s functions, which was not the case in the earlier MDBs. This
        likely derived from the experience of the IBRD, which found it could not develop a project pipeline without the
        provision of extensive advisory services (IBRD 1948). This is further demonstration that the network between
        the MDBs started early. The establishing agreements of the subsequent RDBs – the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>,
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, and EBRD – all include <a class="item2"></a>technical assistance in their functions.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The IADB supported the creation of other RDBs (Culpeper 1997). Still, the supporters of SUNFED at the UN
        continued their efforts and even started drafting statutes in 1957. US views had been shifting, which was clear
        by 1958, but they wanted a soft lending facility under their control rather than the UN, hence tied it to the
        World Bank. The US had other motivations for supporting the IDA too, they had been accumulating non-convertible
        foreign exchange through the US food aid programme sale of surplus agricultural commodities and saw the IDA as
        an outlet for these holdings (Shaw 2005). Further, it was clear that the outlook for developing countries was
        not great and that the IBRD could not provide the needed support. Indeed, a report on the <a class="item2"></a>US Development Loan Fund had noted the IBRD was more like ‘the international equivalent of the
        Export-Import Bank rather than’ a loan fund (United States Committee on Government Operations 1960, 33). In
        other words, the IBRD had a hard-nosed business focus. Once the US supported the IDA idea, the US Treasury
        Secretary took an outline for it to the IBRD, and they then filled out the details and the IDA was <a class="item2"></a>launched in 1960.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The consequences of this dec<a class="item2"></a>ision were profound. The UN ‘became a residual organization in
        economic and social development programs’ (Shaw 2005, 58). The World Bank, in contrast, with the IDA add-on
        increased its resources and client base and was able to move into whole new areas of work that were not
        self-liquidating like most <a class="item2"></a>IBRD lending, including poverty and the social sector. The IDA
        may have slightly reduced Bank reliance on Wall Street, but it increased the power of major donor states
        because of the need for regular resource replenishments (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). The <a class="item2"></a>desirability of IDA resources helped facilitate structural adjustment lending in the 1980s at the
        same time as donors, especially the US, intervened more in policymaking. Overall, the IDA add-on put the Bank
        in a tremendous position of power in relation to borrowers, meaning that it is not a servant of sovereign
        states – as the UN system was designed to be (Shaw 2005, 59). The Bank was meant to liaise with the UN system
        but in practice even liaison has been weak and there is a chasm between the two organisations. In another
        weakening of the UN system, a group of Northern states set up a coordination mechanism for donors in 1960
        through the grouping of rich states, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (<a class="item2"></a>OECD), which came to be called the Development Assistance Committee (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>DAC</abbr>). It gets to decide what counts as aid and has become an influential voice in
        development debates.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Despite the focus on <a class="item2"></a>poverty and social lending in the debate that produced the IDA, its
        purposes – like that of the IBRD – make no mention of poverty. The IDA aims to ‘promote economic development,
        increase productivity and thus raise standards of living…,’ which will trickle down to raise standards of
        living (World Bank 1960, 2). This is not surprising as the IBRD played a key role in drafting the Articles and
        President Black promised that the ‘IDA will not be a “soft lender”’ (cited in Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997,
        155). To protect the IBRD’s creditworthiness, the IDA was created under its own establishing agreement, which
        duplicates the IBRD’s with three changes: first, the Articles identify developed and developing countries and
        link countries’ access to the IDA to their status to ration its concessional resources, second, the IDA’s
        voting structure is slightly more favourable to developing countries, and, third, the IDA can fund social
        projects. Even though they have separate Articles and finances, the IBRD and IDA function as one institution.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        By the late 1960s, the World Bank was largely focussed on <a class="item2"></a>assisting poorer countries,
        having reduced lending to rich states, and diversified sectoral loan allocations (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997,
        140). This did not happen just through the Bank’s own vision of course, but in the context of rapid
        decolonisation, demands from the Global South, and challenges to the Keynesian, welfare, modernisation
        development model. The IDA and retained IBRD earnings also facilitated expansion, though the big push took
        place under President McNamara (see <a class="item2">Table 3.1</a>), who turned his zeal for prosecuting the
        <a class="item2"></a>Vietnam War to combatting poverty or, to be precise, promoting redistribution with growth
        and later basic human needs. The Bank expanded into soft sectors including health, education, water supply, and
        agriculture. In a way, McNamara was re-inserting welfare into the Keynesian, welfare, modernisation model, but
        in a minimalist form with the focus on absolute poverty reduction rather than on equality and rights, which has
        continued to be the Bank’s focus. The basic needs approach increased the level of intervention in developing
        countries at the same time as bolstering the legitimacy of the Bank as a development agency (Rist 1997). It
        was, in Gramscian terms, part of the hegemonic struggle to shore up capitalist development combining coercive
        and consensual elements (Engel 2010).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        From 1969, the Nixon Administration supported McNamara’s growth plans for the Bank, because they wanted to
        increase private US bank lending globally to centralise the role of the US dollar in international finance and
        hence shore up US hegemony (Gowan 1999, 22). The Bank was useful because of its role as a recycler of funds and
        signaller to private finance. In practice, basic needs lending expanded after 1974 when McNamara discovered the
        integrated rural development approach. By the later years of McNamara’s Presidency, the Keynesian consensus was
        under attack and <a class="item2"></a>neoliberalism and structural adjustment came to dominate the Bank, which
        is discussed in <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a>.
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">3.3 <a class="item6"></a>Sub-regional and general expansion of multilateral development
      banking</h2>
<div class="item">
        From 1960 to 1977, a further 18 MDBs were added to the system, ten of these in the 1970s. Only two were from
        Europe, the rest from the rapidly growing number of newly independent states. MDBs continued to grow too
        following the collapse of the Bretton Woods monetary order and the first oil shock in the early 1970s. Eight
        new MDBs were established between 1974 and 1979, indicating that they may even have been a response to the
        chaos generated by this time. This section explores the logic of this expansion linking it to geopolitics and
        development ideas, though given the number of actors, the section paints a broad picture, with the details of
        each MDB explored in later chapters.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        After the IDA, the next MDB was from the Latin American region, which had fought for and won independence
        earlier than most of Africa and Asia. It was a sub-regional development bank (SRDB) and, like all the
        subsequent early <a class="item2"></a>SRDBs, it aimed to promote the integration and development of a
        sub-region. And growth of both regions and sub-regions were seen by structuralism as an instrument for
        promoting economic transformation (Bruszt and Palestini 2016). The <a class="item2"></a>Central American Bank
        for Economic Integration (<abbr>CABEI</abbr>) was established in 1960 by five Central American states, which
        were all members of the IADB. This makes it the first MDB established without the backing of a First World
        state. As part of their treaty on economic integration they established a SRDB to support sub-regionalisation,
        possibly taking inspiration from the <a class="item2"></a>European integration project and the EIB, but
        examining its purposes reveals clear influences from UN-ECLA and structuralism. As <a class="item2">Chapter
        7</a> outlines, <abbr>CABEI</abbr>’s objectives start with the aims visible in earlier MDBs of regional
        development and balanced economic and social development but go on to specify that it will support projects and
        programmes in infrastructure, industry, and agriculture that benefit and modernise the region. Thus, it
        incorporated ISI in its objectives more directly than the IADB. Further, <abbr>CABEI</abbr>’s subscriptions
        were not weighted, so founding states had equal shareholdings (Cochrane 1965), though this changed with the
        introduction of non-regional and non-founding member states, which quite a number of the smaller MDBs did in
        the 1980s, as discussed in the next chapter.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Several Soviet states created the International Bank for Economic Cooperation (<a class="item2"></a>IBEC) in
        1964. It started as something closer to the IMF, but post-Cold War reforms saw it become an MDB. Next from what
        was then Communist Eastern Europe and Russia was the International Investment Bank (<a class="item2"></a>IIB)
        in 1970, a Soviet competitor to the World Bank. Its original aims are worth quoting as they are at one level so
        different from all the other SRDBs yet, at another level, they share the view of development as
        industrialisation and growth. It aims to provide:
      </div>
<blockquote class="item13">
<div class="quote">
          long-term and medium-term credits primarily for the implementation of measures relating to the international
          socialist division of labour, specialization and co-operation in production, expenditure for the broadening
          of the raw materials and fuels base in the common interest and the building of projects in other branches of
          the economy…
        </div>
<footer class="item14">
          (IIB 1970, 344)
        </footer>
</blockquote>
<div class="item">
        The <a class="item2"></a>IIB’s aims have since been changed quite radically, which is discussed in more detail
        in <a class="item2">Chapter 7</a>.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The 1955 <a class="item2"></a>Bandung Conference helped stimulate the idea of pan-Africanism, and five African
        MDBs were created between 1964 and 1975, the first an RDB – the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> in 1964 – and then four
        SRDBs. The <abbr>AfDB</abbr> followed the IADB’s purposes in promoting accelerated economic and social
        development, and it also specified that development must be sustainable. Like <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, and inspired
        by NAM and Group of 77 (<a class="item2"></a>G77) agenda of seeking independent development, it was formed
        without any superpower or First World engagement (Culpeper 1997, English and Mule 1996, Mingst 1990). The four
        African SRDBs originally had only regional developing country membership as well and all arose from
        sub-regional integration efforts, which the UN Economic Commission for Africa (<a class="item2"></a>UN-ECA)
        played a key role in (Humphrey 2019). Many of the regional integration and trade agreements are no longer
        operational yet the MDBs remain. The SRDBs are the:
      </div>
<ul class="list-bullet">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
            East African Development Bank (<abbr>EADB</abbr>), formed in 1967 to support the East African Community
            (<abbr>EAC</abbr>);
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
            West <a class="item2"></a>African Development Bank (known by its French acronym, <abbr>BOAD</abbr>),
            established in 1973 as part of the West African Monetary Union (<a class="item2"></a>WAMU);
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
<a class="item2"></a>Development Bank of Central African States (known by its French acronym, BD<a class="item2"></a>EAC), set up in 1975 to support the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CEMAC</abbr>); and
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list1">
            Fund for Cooperation, Compensation, and Development formed as part of a second West African initiative –
            the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) – in 1975; in 1999, it was re<a class="item2"></a>named the <a class="item2"></a>ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development (<a class="item2"></a>EBID).
          </div>
</li>
</ul>
<div class="item">
        All four African MDBs have standard SRDB purposes, although the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>EADB</abbr> includes
        a role for regional promotion and <a class="item2"></a><abbr>BOAD</abbr> has a strong focus on mobilising
        domestic resources. These SRDBs demonstrate the conflicting forces at play in post-colonial Africa of
        fragmentation and cooperation – as in Latin America, economic cooperation was seen as vital to post-colonial
        development. Mostly the African S<a class="item2"></a>RDBs financed infrastructure and small and medium
        enterprises to support industrialisation (Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli 2018).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Following the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, the next RDB was the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> established in 1966. It did not have
        anti-colonial credentials being proposed by Japan, then an emerging regional and global power. The US
        originally opposed the MDB’s formation but later changed mind, seeing it as a way to contain perceived Soviet
        and Chinese influence by fostering regional growth and cooperation (Dent 2008, Kappagoda 1995). With Japan and
        the US as its major shareholders, it adopted much more pragmatic and capitalist language in its Charter with
        the aim of fostering ‘economic growth and co-operation’ in the region (<abbr>AsDB</abbr> 1967, 2). Like the
        World Bank, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> now articulates a <a class="item2"></a>poverty-free region as its mission.
        The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> mirrored earlier MDBs closely from its inception, with the first President Takeshi
        Watanabe attending IBRD and IADB meetings to see how they were run before the Asian MDB began operations
        (McCawley 2012). Notably, there are no S<a class="item2"></a>RDBs in South or Southeast Asia, though a couple
        emerged that cover Central Asia later.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The next two MDBs established were again in the Latin America and Caribbean region <em class="calibre4">circa</em> 1970 with a
        further one added in 1974, bringing the regional total to five MDBs. The Caribbean Development Bank
        (<abbr>CDB</abbr>) was established in 1969 to support regional and local financial institutions and the
        development of regional capital markets as well as the usual SRDB goals. The innovation of building local
        financial markets harks back to the failed attempts at creating an <a class="item2"></a>Inter-American Bank and
        is a reminder of the recent development of public and private financial markets in some parts of the Global
        South. The <abbr>CDB</abbr> originally had 16 regional members along with Canada and the UK as non-regional
        members. While additional stakeholders have been added including China in 1998, the US is still not a member.
        The famous development economist Sir W. Arthur Lewis was the <abbr>CDB</abbr>’s first president. Lewis was a
        key founder of classical <a class="item2"></a>Growth Theory which posited that states need to focus on growth,
        not redistribution, and that poverty was an employment problem, making it a suitable topic for economists
        (Engel 2019, Todaro 1985). His work on the need to transfer labour from the supposedly inefficient rural
        subsistence sector to the industrial high productivity sector was quite influential at the World Bank. The
        logic of most MDBs today is still to fund the enabling environment for this growth model, but the model has
        gaps and investments in industrialisation often came at a high human and environmental cost.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The Development Bank of Latin America (known by the Spanish acronym <abbr>CAF</abbr>) was established in 1970
        and like the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>CDB</abbr> it was tasked with ‘providing multiple financial services to
        clients in the public and private sectors’ in order to achieve regional integration and sustainable development
        (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CAF</abbr> 2015, 9). It started operations without member states from the Global
        North. USAID, Canada, the IADB, and a few European states provided resources early on but stopped, leading it
        to struggle to gain enough financial resources to operate until later restructuring (Humphrey 2016). The
        <a class="item2"></a>Financial Fund for the Development of the River Plate Basin (known since 2018 as FONPLATA
        Development Bank), followed in 1974 to support the River Plate Basin. It still has just five regional members:
        Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay. It has a strong focus on studies and technical assistance,
        though they are also empowered to act as a financial agent or broker for loans for members (FONPLATA 2018).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Next in the MDB chronology is the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (<abbr>AFESD</abbr>). Its
        founding documents were prepared in 1968 but entered into force in 1972 and it was the first of a group of four
        diverse MDBs whose common feature is their Arab country-led shareholding. The Arab Fund is an SRDB with the
        rather pragmatic aim of ‘[f]inancing economic projects of an investment character… to public or private
        organizations and institutions, giving preference to economic projects that are vital to the Arab entity and to
        joint Arab projects’ (<abbr>AFESD</abbr> 2016). While it is best understood as an SRDB, we have included it in
        <a class="item2">Chapter 8</a> as a specialised MDB alongside the other Arab-led MDBs as they are an
        interrelated group that emerged after oil prices started to increase in 1971 (Corm 2006). The Arab Bank for
        Economic Development in Africa (<abbr>BADEA</abbr>) was established in 1973. It was a response to the
        increasing anger in the <a class="item2"></a>Third World about rising oil prices but also reflected the Arab
        desire to replace Israeli influence in Africa and promote Arab access to raw materials (Shushan and Marcoux
        2011). It was the first development bank whose aim was to promote linkages between two regions, by providing
        financing and technical assistance. It was quickly followed by the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) in 1974,
        which is a specialised bank operated in accordance with Shari’ah financial principles that ban the practice of
        interest. Its capital was subscribed in a new accounting currency, the Islamic Dinar (Delikanli, Dimitrov, and
        Agolli 2018). Its purposes are economic development and social progress, with the level of focus on human
        well-being standing out among the MDBs. It has stuck to its original, albeit broad, sectoral focus on
        transportation, infrastructure, energy, agriculture, and social infrastructure and not shifted with trends like
        policy-based loans, conditionality, or safeguards (Kellerman 2019). Its membership is not limited to Arab
        states but to those with a majority Islamic citizenry, making it a unique MDB.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Next came the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund for International Development (OFID) in
        1976, which has the very pragmatic aim of promoting cooperation between OPEC member states and developing
        countries by providing financial support to the latter, making it a bit like <abbr>BADEA</abbr>. Its membership
        is again not limited to Arab states; indeed, Venezuela is the third largest shareholder. Looking at
        shareholdings in these Arab-led MDBs, Saudi Arabia is the largest shareholder in all except the Arab Fund where
        Kuwait has a slightly larger stake (Shushan and Marcoux 2011). Libya has large stakes in the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>BADEA</abbr> and <a class="item2"></a>IsDB and is the third largest shareholder in the
        <a class="item2"></a><abbr>AFESD</abbr> and sixth in the <a class="item2"></a>OFID, which is a left over from
        Muammar Gaddafi’s activist Islamic socialist agenda of the 1970s.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        It is useful to follow the Arab-led MDBs with the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD),
        established in 1977, because Arab states also played a key part in its formation. Intellectually informed by
        calls for a <a class="item2"></a>New International Economic Order (NIEO) in 1974, it is based on an amalgam of
        Keynesian and structuralist ideas. <a class="item2"></a>IFAD’s direct heritage is that of a challenge between
        OECD <abbr>DAC</abbr> donors and <a class="item2"></a>OPEC states in 1974 to each put up around $600 million
        for agricultural development in developing countries (Szasz 1999). This was following the early 1970s <a class="item2"></a>sub-Sahelian food crisis (Wihtol 2014) and a general increase in food insecurity aggravated by the
        1973 oil shock. The negotiations took place in 1974 and 1975, just after the NIEO. IFAD’s structure was coped
        from the World Bank, but its shareholder structure gave equal voting shares to three groups: <abbr>DAC</abbr>
        donors, OPEC, and G77 states. The <a class="item2"></a>G77 states argued very strongly that votes within each
        group should be equally distributed and not on the basis of contribution as <abbr>DAC</abbr> and OPEC states
        wanted (Szasz 1999). The compromise was that each group could decide how they distributed votes and elected
        board members. The <abbr>DAC</abbr> managed to constrain the organisation, however, by mandating that <a class="item2"></a>IFAD could not undertake project appraisals, instead having to rely on evaluations conducted by
        other financial institutions.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        One final MDB was created before 1979, the Nordic Investment Bank (<a class="item2"></a>NIB), established in
        1976. It had been discussed since the 1950s by the five Nordic states – Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and
        Sweden – but a more favourable political climate and the oil shocks provided the needed impetus (Dennis 2015).
        It was set up simply to supplement existing institutions and finance and notably did not have a mandate for
        sub-regional projects.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Overall, by 1979, there were 22 MDBs. MDB creation was very high in Latin America (five banks) and across much
        of Africa (five banks), excluding the southern states where apartheid South Africa still exerted hegemonic
        influence. There were three banks established in Europe including the very large EIB, four Arab-led banks, and
        just one Asian MDB. But by 1979, state debt in many developing countries had already started to build up to
        problematic levels, and this enabled the emerging neoliberal doctrine to be imposed on states through loan
        conditionality, which is discussed in the next chapter. But to conclude this one we explore the debt crisis.
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">3.4 MDBs, debt, and the developing world debt crisis</h2>
<div class="item">
        Using debt to finance investments was a key part of the post-war Keynesian, modernisation, welfare model, which
        the MDBs were a key part of. But they face a unique situation, having a limited clientele and, as detailed in
        <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a>, their non-concessional lending arms need credit-worthy borrowers to get good
        credit ratings, which allows them to borrow cheaply on financial markets and on-lend. Still, with a limited
        number of borrowers, MDBs often become debt-pushers. If they do not keep pushing new loans out the door, they
        run into the problem that borrowers are paying back more than is being lent in new loans. This is called the
        <a class="item2"></a>negative net transfer problem. For most countries, MDBs are not their largest creditors
        but as <a class="item2" href="C08_chapter1_split_000.xhtml#chapter1">Chapter 1</a> outlined, they play a range of roles
        in the development finance system. Their role expanded over the decades, with the World Bank at the centre
        thanks to its repository of data and reports. After the first debt crisis, the World Bank also became a debt
        collector and lender of last resort.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Development banks walk a fine line between pushing debt and worrying that recipients have too much of it. Debt
        was a challenge in some countries as early as the 1950s; a number of Latin American states had existing debt
        portfolios and they had faced two large debt <a class="item2"></a>crises in the 19th century and one in the
        1940s as we saw in <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a>. The World Bank rescheduled loans to Haiti in the 1950s on
        balance of payment grounds and in 1965 made two loans to Brazil to cover the maturities due on earlier loans
        (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). <a class="item2"></a>India’s debt problems were notable from the mid-1960s, but
        it was cushioned by its high level of access to the highly concessional IDA, becoming its largest borrower; the
        IDA was colloquially referred to as the Indian Development Association. The IDA add-on enabled the IBRD to
        reduce its exposure to India and undoubtedly India only met some IBRD and other obligations thanks to IDA
        credits. Nevertheless, India asked the World Bank to lead a rescheduling in 1966 (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        A large debt build-up occurred in the 1970s bolstered by low interest rates and financial innovations beginning
        with the Eurodollar market and syndicated loans, where a group of banks lends to a borrower. The oil price
        hikes of the 1970s had very negative impacts on oil importing developing countries by increasing their costs
        and reducing export prices, meaning they had to borrow to cover the immediate costs of the shock. The oil shock
        created large revenues for oil exporters called petrodollars and these, along with the end of the fixed
        exchange rates system, contributed to a large increase in liquidity in private banks. Like MDBs, private banks
        need to on-lend their funds to pay interest to depositors. Developing countries offered a seemingly lucrative
        market and there was profligate and very large scale lending (Bracking 2009, Scammell 1983). Debt accumulation
        was largest in Latin America with several sub-Saharan African countries following suit. On average, debt-to-GDP
        ratios for low-income countries increased from 13% in 1970 to 46% in 1982 (Kose et al. 2020, 62). Loans were
        also made to what can only be described as illegitimate, odious, or corrupt regimes (Toussaint 2019). And too
        many projects did not benefit local populations, or caused too much environmental, social, or human rights
        harm. <a class="item2"></a>Legal and illegal capital flight was a particular problem, as Caufield (1998, 132)
        noted, the ‘amount of money that left the Third World during the lending boom is staggering. The World Bank
        estimates that between 1976 and 1984, capital flight from Latin America equalled the increase in the
        continent’s external debt.’
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The World Bank under McNamara had a liberal approach to debt and expanded Bank lending while encouraging
        developing countries to expand their access to private finance (Caufield 1998, George and Sabelli 1994,
        Toussaint 1999). The South was creating their own MDBs too, further expanding debt relations. While private
        sector lending accounted for most of the debt, MDBs signalled that countries were credit-worthy. It seemed for
        a time like the lending would be sustainable, though that was illusory. The immediate triggers for the debt
        crisis were the second oil shock in 1979 and the <a class="item2"></a>Volcker shock of 1981. The second
        <a class="item2"></a>oil shock led to a recession that hit the exports of developing countries very hard.
        Developed countries tightened their fiscal and monetary policy leading to increased interest rates globally and
        increased debt service payments. Paul Volcker, then Chair of the US Federal Reserve, almost doubled the US
        federal funds rate in 1981 to 20%, in what is often referred to as the Volcker shock. Given the power of the US
        dollar, it effectively sets global interest rates, still US banks also directly held 37% of the $600 billion
        developing country debt (Bracking 2009). In 1982, amid a global recession partly bought on by the Volcker
        Shock, Mexico defaulted on its loans. Quickly thereafter most private lending to developing states stopped and
        the debt crisis began. Some 40 states found themselves in arrears, 27 had to restructure debts and 16 of those
        were in Latin America and the Caribbean (Kose et al. 2020).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The IMF, World Bank, and larger MDBs thrive in financial crises. Borrowing increases and private finance looks
        to them as debt collectors and as a safe place to invest. In the 1982 crisis, the debt deals turned private
        debts into public ones; the private banks were largely paid and even received large fees for loan rescheduling.
        The Bank and other MDBs took on a larger share of developing country debt and became the global system’s main
        debt collectors. They had done this in part using what George and Sabelli (1994, 55) aptly called McNamara’s
        ‘parting gift’ to the World Bank: <a class="item2"></a>structural adjustment loans. These enabled the
        principles of the new Washington Consensus to be enforced upon developing countries with ferocity.
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">3.5 Conclusion</h2>
<div class="item">
        This chapter shows how MDBs were created during the modernisation or Bretton Woods era, which had a relatively
        non-financialised banking system in response to the excesses of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The
        Cold War political context was a key factor in many of the MDB creation – many larger MDBs were created by the
        Western block and the US as the political hegemon of the time had to be supportive or at least not obstructive.
        The Soviet Union played a similar role for states then in its sphere of influence, but it was not as interested
        in MDBs and only the IBEC and IIB were established in its sphere. Some of the MDBs in Africa and Latin America
        reflected more structuralist development ideas.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The MDBs were designed to meet one of the shortcomings of capitalist <a class="item2"></a>finance; private
        banks can be risk averse, particularly in developing country contexts, and so national and multilateral
        development banks were meant to provide an alternative way to boost investment. However, the MDBs played a role
        in the growing financialisation of the 1970s by encouraging lending to the <a class="item2"></a>Third World and
        setting standards for it as well as by promoting new financial instruments, so they were a contributor to the
        developing country debt crisis. Financialisation took off during the 1980s, which is where <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a> takes up the story: MDB creation in the neoliberal era.
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>
<ol class="biblioentrylist">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
<abbr>AFESD</abbr>. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Agreement Establishing the Arab Fund for Economic and Social
            Development</em>. Kuwait. Accessed 14 May 2020. <a class="item2" href="http://www.arabfund.org">http://www.arabfund.org/Default.aspx?pageId=429</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Amin, Samir. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Capitalism in the Age of Globalization: The Management of Contemporary Society</em>.
            London and New York: Zed Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
<abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 1967. <em class="calibre4">Agreement Establishing the Asian Development Bank.</em> Manila: Asian
            Development Bank. Accessed 24 November 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.adb.org">https://www.adb.org/documents/agreement-establishing-asian-development-bank-adb-charter</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Barria, Lilian A., and Steven D. Roper. 2004. “Economic Transition in Latin American and Post-Communist
            Countries: A Comparison of Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">International Journal of Politics, Culture,
            and Society</em> 17 (4):619–38. doi: 10.1023/ B:IJPS.0000031235.74193.a4.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Berger, Mark T. 2004. <em class="calibre4">The Battle for Asia: From Decolonization to Globalization</em>. London and New
            York: Routledge Curzon.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Block, Fred L. 1977. <em class="calibre4">The Origins of International Economic Disorder: A Study of United States
            International Monetary Policy from World War II to the Present</em>. Berkeley: University of California
            Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bracking, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Money and Power: Great Predators in the Political Economy of Development</em>.
            London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bruszt, Lazlo, and Stefano Palestini. 2016. “Regional Development Governance.” In <em class="calibre4">The Oxford Handbook
            of Comparative Regionalism</em>, edited by Tanja A. Börzel and Thomas Risse, 374–404. Oxford: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bussière, Eric, and Emilie Willaert. 2006. <em class="calibre4">Council of Europe Development Bank: The Social Development
            Bank in Europe</em>. Paris: Council of Europe Development Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
<abbr>CAF</abbr>. 2015. <em class="calibre4">Agreement Establishing Corporación Andina de Fomento</em>. Caracas: Banco de
            Desarrollo de América Latina. Accessed 24 November 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.caf.com">https://www.caf.com/media/29934/caf-agreement-establishing-10032015.pdf</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Caufield, Catherine. 1998. <em class="calibre4">Masters of Illusion : The World Bank and the Poverty of Nations</em>.
            London: Pan Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cochrane, James D. 1965. “The Central American Bank for Economic Integration: A Descriptive Note.”
            <em class="calibre4">Caribbean Studies</em> 5 (2):64–73.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Corm, Georges. 2006. “The Arab Experience.” In <em class="calibre4">Regional Financial Cooperation</em>, edited by José
            Antonio Ocampa, 291–328. Washington, DC: UN ECLA and Brookings Insitution Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Culpeper, Roy. 1997. <em class="calibre4">Titans or Behemoths?</em> London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Delikanli, Ihsan Ugur, Todor Dimitrov, and Roena Agolli. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Multilateral Development Banks:
            Governance and Finance</em>. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Dennis, Bengt. 2015. “Green Light at Third Attempt: How NIB Came to be Forty Years Ago.” Nordiic Investment
            Bank. Accessed 20 May. <a class="item2" href="https://www.nib.int">https://www.nib.int/who_we_are/news_and_media/articles/1761/green_light_at_third_attempt_how_nib_came_to_be_forty_years_ago</a>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Dent, Christopher M. 2008. “The Asian Development Bank and Developmental Regionalism in East Asia.”
            <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em> 29 (4):767–86. doi: 10.1080/01436590802052714.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan. 2010. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in Vietnam and Indonesia:
            Inheritance of Loss</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan. 2019. “Development Economics: Classical, Neoclassical, Critical.” In <em class="calibre4">Oxford Research
            Encyclopedia of International Studies</em>, edited by Renée Marlin-Bennett, 1–24. Oxford: Oxford University
            Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Engerman, David C. 2018. <em class="calibre4">The Price of Aid: The Economic Cold War in India</em>. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            English, E. Phillip, and Harris M. Mule. 1996. <em class="calibre4">The African Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne
            Rienner.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            European Union. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Consolidated Versions of the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty Establishing
            the European Community</em>. Brussels: European Union. Accessed 24 November 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://eur-lex.europa.eu">https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A12002E%2FTXT</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Fine, Ben. 2001. <em class="calibre4">Social Capital versus Social Theory: Political Economy and Social Science at the Turn
            of the Millennium</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            FONPLATA. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Financial Fund for the Development of the River Plate Basin Articles of Agreement</em>.
            Accessed 24 November 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.fonplata.org">https://www.fonplata.org/sites/default/files/paginas-fonplata/archivos/EN%20-%20Constitutive%20Agreement%20%28Update%202018%29.pdf</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1975. “How Keynes Came to America.” In <em class="calibre4">Essays on John Maynard Keynes</em>,
            edited by Milo Keynes, 132–41. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gardner, Richard N. 1980. <em class="calibre4">Sterling-dollar Diplomacy in Current Perspective: The Origins and the
            Prospects of Our International Economic Order</em>, 3rd ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            George, Susan, and Fabrizio Sabelli. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Faith and Credit: The World Bank’s Secular Empire</em>.
            London: Penguin Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gowan, Peter. 1999. <em class="calibre4">The Global Gamble: Washington’s Faustian Bid for World Dominance</em>. London:
            Verso.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Griffith-Jones, Stephany, and Judith Tyson. 2013. The European Investment Bank: Lessons for Developing
            Countries. In <em class="calibre4">WIDER Working Paper</em>.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Helleiner, Eric. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Forgotten Foundations of Bretton Woods: International Development and the Making
            of the Postwar Order</em>. Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Helleiner, Eric. 2017. “What’s Been Missing from Conventional Histories of Bretton Woods?” In <em class="calibre4">Global
            Perspectives on the Bretton Woods Conference and the Post-War World Order</em>, edited by Giles Scott-Smith
            and J. Simon Rofe, 17–34. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2016. “The Invisible Hand: Financial Pressures and Organisational Convergence in
            Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Journal of Development Studies</em> 52 (1):92–112. doi:
            10.1080/00220388.2015.1075978.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2019. “‘Minilateral’ Development Banks: What the Rise of Africa’s Trade and Development
            Bank Says about Multilateral Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):164–90. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12467.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            IaDB. 1996. <em class="calibre4">Agreement Establishing the Inter-American Development Bank</em>. Washington, DC:
            Inter-American Development Bank. Accessed 11 March 2020. <a class="item2" href="http://www.iadb.org">https://www.iadb.org/en/legal-resource-center/historic-agreement-establishing-inter-american-development-bank</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            IBRD. 1948. Third Annual Report to the Board of Governors, 1947–1948. Washington, DC: International Bank
            for Reconstruction and Development.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            IFC. 2012. <em class="calibre4">Articles of Agreement</em>. Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation. Accessed 24
            November 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.ifc.org">https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/ifc+governance/articles/about+ifc+-+ifc+articles+of+agreement</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            IIB. 1970. Agreement Concerning the Establishment of an International Investment Bank. New York: United
            Nations – Treaty Series Volume 801, 1975. Accessed 11 March 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://treaties.un.org">https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/Volume%20801/v801.pdf</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kappagoda, Nihal. 1995. <em class="calibre4">The Asian Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kapur, Devesh, John P. Lewis, and Richard Webb. 1997. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank Its First Half Century, Volume 1:
            History</em>. 2 vols. Vol. 1: History. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kellerman, Miles. 2019. “The Proliferation of Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International
            Organization</em> 14 (1):107–45. doi: 10.1007/s11558-018-9302-y.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Keynes, John Maynard. 1973. <em class="calibre4">The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money</em>. London:
            Macmillan for the Royal Economic Society.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kose, M. Ayhan, Peter Nagle, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Naotaka Sugawara. 2020. <em class="calibre4">Global Waves of Debt:
            Causes and Consequences</em>. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Krasner, Stephen D. 1981. “Power Structures and Regional Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">International
            Organization</em> 35 (2):303–28.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mason, Edward S., and Robert E. Asher. 1973. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank Since Bretton Woods</em>. Washington, DC:
            The Brookings Institution.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            McCawley, Peter. 2012. <em class="calibre4">Banking on the Future of Asia and the Pacific: 50 Years of the Asian Development
            Bank</em>. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Meade, James. 1975. “The Keynesian Revolution.” In <em class="calibre4">Essays on John Maynard Keynes</em>, edited by Milo
            Keynes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Mingst, Karen. 1990. <em class="calibre4">Politics &amp; the African Development Bank</em>. Lexington: The University of
            Kentucky Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Murphy, Hannah. 2014. “The World Bank and Core Labour Standards: Between Flexibility and Regulation.”
            <em class="calibre4">Review of International Political Economy</em> 21 (2):399–431. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2013.779591.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Oliver, Robert W. 1971. <em class="calibre4">Early Plans for a World Bank</em>, <em class="calibre4">Princeton Studies in International
            Finance No. 29</em>. Princeton, NJ: Department of Economics, Princeton University.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Oliver, Robert W. 1975. <em class="calibre4">International Economic Co-operation and the World Bank</em>. London and
            Basingstoke: Macmillan Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Peet, Richard. 2003. <em class="calibre4">Unholy Trinity: The IMF, World Bank and WTO</em>. London: Zed Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Phillips, David A. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Reforming the World Bank: Twenty Years of Trial</em> – <em class="calibre4">and Error</em>.
            Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Prebisch, Raúl. 1950. <em class="calibre4">The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principle Problems</em>. New
            York: United Nations.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Rapley, John. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Understanding Development: Theory and Practice in the Third World</em>. Boulder,
            CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers Inc.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Rist, Gilbert. 1997. <em class="calibre4">The History of Development: From Western Origins to Global Faith</em>. Translated
            by Patrick Camiller. London and New York: Zed Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Roll, Eric. 1973. <em class="calibre4">A History of Economic Thought</em>, 4th ed. London: Faber and Faber Ltd.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Scammell, W.M. 1983. <em class="calibre4">The International Economy Since 1945</em>, 2nd ed. London: Macmillan Education
            Ltd.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Shaw, D. John. 2005. “Turning Point in the Evolution of Soft Financing: The United Nations and the World
            Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Canadian Journal of Development Studies</em> XXVI (1):43–61.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Shushan, Debra, and Christopher Marcoux. 2011. “The Rise (and Decline?) or Arab Aid: Generosity and
            Allocation in the Oil Era.” <em class="calibre4">World Development</em> 39 (11):1969–80.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Singer, Hans W. 1950. “The Distribution of Gains between Investing and Borrowing Countries.” <em class="calibre4">American
            Economic Review</em> 40 (2):478.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Szasz, Paul C. 1999. “Establishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development.” <em class="calibre4">Studies in
            Transnational Legal Policy</em> 31–32:32–43.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Todaro, Michael P. 1985. <em class="calibre4">Economic Development in the Third World: An Introduction to Problems and
            Policies in a Global Perspective</em>, 3rd ed. New York: Longman.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Toussaint, Eric. 1999. <em class="calibre4">Your Money or Your Life! The Tyranny of Global Finance</em>. Translated by Raghu
            Krishnan and Vicki Briault Manus. London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Toussaint, Eric. 2008. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank: A Critical Primer</em>. Translated by Elizabeth Anne, Vicki
            Briault, Bertrand Declercq, Sushovan Dhar, Judith Harris, Raghu Krishnan, Marie Lagatta, Christine
            Pagnoulle, Véronique Renard, Gillian Sloane-Seale and Diren Valayden. London, Anne Arbor: Pluto Press in
            associatin with CADTM, Committee for the Abolition of Third World Debt.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Toussaint, Eric. 2019. <em class="calibre4">The Debt System: A History of Sovereign Debts and Their Repudiation</em>.
            Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Tussie, Dianne. 1995. <em class="calibre4">The Inter-American Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            United States Committee on Government Operations. 1960. Operations of the Development Loan Fund.
            Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Urquidi, Victor L. 1996. “Reconstruction vs. Development: The IMF and the World Bank.” In <em class="calibre4">The Bretton
            Woods</em> – <em class="calibre4">GATT System: Retrospect and Prospect After Fifty Years</em>, edited by Orin Kirshner,
            30–51. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharp.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wihtol, Robert. 2014. Whither Multilateral Development Finance? In <em class="calibre4"><abbr>AsDBI</abbr> Working Paper
            Series</em>. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            World Bank. 1960. <em class="calibre4">International Development Association Articles of Agreement</em>. Washington, DC:
            World Bank. Accessed 10 March 2020. <a class="item2" href="https://www.worldbank.org">https://www.worldbank.org/en/about/articles-of-agreement</a>
</div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2012. <em class="calibre4">International Bank of Reconstruction and Development Articles of Agreement</em>.
            Washington, DC: World Bank. Accessed 24 November 2020. <a class="item2" href="http://www.worldbank.org">https://www.worldbank.org/en/about/articles-of-agreement/ibrd-articles-of-agreement</a>.
          </div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<h1 class="toc"><a class="item2" href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter4">4 Development thinking, debt, and the
    multilateral development bank system: 1980–2020</a></h1>
<div class="item">
      This second chapter on the <a class="item2"></a>evolution of the multilateral development bank (MDB) system
      starts in 1980 when neoliberalism captured the global political economy including the World Bank and other large
      MDBs. It journeys through a range of modifications to neoliberalism leading to the current era, which we call
      retroliberal following Murray and Overton (2016). There were nine MDBs established in this period, eight still
      functioning, thus by the end of 2020, there were 30 functioning MDBs, several with multiple financing arms. As
      with <a class="item2">Chapter 3</a>, the emergence of and shifts in the MDBs are linked to three factors:
      <a class="item2"></a>geopolitics, development discourse, and debt relations.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      This chapter is divided into three periods, each linked to a major debt crisis that can be associated with calls
      capitalism’s need for <a class="item2"></a>spatial fixes (Harvey 2010). The first period was high neoliberalism
      or the Washington Consensus era; it lasted from 1980 to 1997 and began and ended with debt crises. At the start,
      the Third World <a class="item2"></a>debt crisis saw large MDBs become debt collectors and impose the new
      orthodoxy of free markets, free trade, small government, and individual responsibility on recipient states. Only
      a few MDBs were created during this period, including the only MDB with a pro-democracy, pro-market mandate: the
      <a class="item2"></a>EBRD. The Washington Consensus era ended with the 1997 <a class="item2"></a>Asian Financial
      Crisis, by which time the social costs of fundamentalist neoliberalism had become too great, including increasing
      poverty and social inequalities. The post-Washington Consensus era of 1998–2009 was the response to the problems
      of orthodox neoliberalism. Poverty reduction seemed to replace economic growth at the top of the development
      agenda, supported by the 2000 MDGs and, later, the 2015 SDGs. However, the term <em class="calibre4">post</em>-Washington
      Consensus highlights the continuities with <a class="item2"></a><a class="item2"></a>neoliberalism – the focus on
      growth and private markets had not disappeared and the poverty-reduction agenda was ultimately rather minimalist;
      still, there was a sense that the development agenda had become more progressive. This period saw the rise of
      China and leftist movements in Latin America, which resulted in an increased focus on the role of the state and
      new development paradigms aimed at challenging the Washington Consensus. The era closed when debt expansion in
      the US and Western and Central Europe achieved critical mass in the 2007–8 GFC.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The <a class="item2"></a>GFC changed development discourse, but not as significantly as would be hoped. The
      moniker <em class="calibre4">retroliberal</em> for the period 2010–20 highlights that policy responses to the GFC mostly shored up
      the position of capital over labour by socialising private losses while maintaining the privatisation of gains.
      Financialisation was only reined in for a brief moment, before again being unleashed in another example of how
      the practices of neoliberalism adapt to circumstances (Cahill 2014). Still, a more state-centric, nationalist era
      has emerged. Aid and development finance are again viewed in terms of the benefits they provide to donor states’
      firms rather than to poverty reduction. Further, in large part thanks to Chinese interests, infrastructure is
      again a key focus for development finance, which is a return to modernisation era thinking along with the revised
      fixation on economic growth. Hence the retro prefix makes sense; it hints at the retrospective and retrograde
      elements of development discourse in 2020, with the MDBs again at centre stage after having taken somewhat of a
      back seat during the early 2000s.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      A major danger of this shift is its impact on debt. Already prior to the 2020 Coronavirus crisis, the IMF and
      World Bank were warning of growing debt, with the Bank calling the build-up of debt in EMDEs from 2010 to 2018
      the ‘largest, fastest and most broad-based increase’ in the past 50 years (Kose et al. 2020, 111). <a class="item2"></a>COVID-19 is causing further debt build-up and may trigger a debt crisis, whereas the usual triggers
      of the past 50 years were financial or banking crises. It is an emerging context, yet it seems rather clear that
      the MDBs are again going to be key players in another debt crisis.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The three eras explored in the chapter each follows the same structure: first, changes in developing thinking are
      briefly analysed, second, changes in the World Bank are outlined, followed by a third section on changes in the
      other MDBs, and a fourth analysing the growth of new MDBs in each era.
    </div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">4.1 The <a class="item6"></a>Washington Consensus era: 1980–97</h2>
<div class="item">
        The global shift from the Keynesian, welfare, modernisation model to neoliberal structural adjustment – or
        <a class="item2"></a>austerity politics – must be told in conjunction with that of the IMF and World Bank. This
        is because the policy prescriptions associated with this neoliberal approach were negotiated between the US and
        the Bretton Woods twins in Washington, DC, and hence are called the Washington Consensus (Williamson 1990). The
        policies reflected the resurgence of a strand of neoclassical economics propounded by scholars like Friedrich
        von Hayek and Milton Friedman, which rejected the post-war consensus and instead promoted the moral and
        economic priority of individuals and markets over society and the state. It was a broad project ushered in by a
        new politico-economic climate with the election of <a class="item2"></a>Margaret Thatcher in the UK, <a class="item2"></a>Ronald Reagan in the US, and Helmut Kohl in West Germany. There were neoliberal regimes elected or
        imposed through coups and other non-electoral mechanisms around the world, for example, the <a class="item2"></a>Augusto Pinochet regime in Chile. Multinational corporations promoted <a class="item2"></a>neoliberal approaches in ways that benefitted them. In Gramscian terms, neoliberalism’s spread was
        through both consent and coercion. In examining the practices of governments, it is important to remember that
        they have been happy to implement a range of policies that are not always immediately in keeping with
        neoliberalism or may not appear to be neoliberal, but this pragmatic approach reinforces the legitimacy of that
        state and often serves particular capitalist interests. In the wake of financial and banking crises, the GFC
        being a case in point, governments have often resorted to Keynesian-type policies, but generally only as a
        temporary measure in order to deepen neoliberalism in the long run (Cahill 2014).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The Washington Consensus clustered around three broad commitments: macroeconomic stability, <a class="item2"></a>outward orientation, and <a class="item2"></a>domestic liberalisation (Fine 2001). In the early
        years, it tended to be implemented in two phases: first, short-term <a class="item2"></a>macroeconomic
        stabilisation carried out quickly via ‘big bang’ reforms, which was the focus of IMF programmes; and, second,
        long-term exhaustive microeconomic reforms including trade liberalisation, privatisation of state-owned
        enterprises, and then later utilities, changes to taxation, land titling to make land more easily alienable,
        labour market reform, and deregulation of banking and capital movement (Chossudovsky 1997). This latter
        programme tended to be implemented jointly by the IMF, World Bank, and RDBs. The Washington Consensus was based
        on a ‘profoundly cynical view of the state in developing countries’ (Toye 1993, 135).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The <a class="item2"></a>Third World debt crisis provided the IMF and World Bank the opportunity to implement
        neoliberal policies as loan conditions, which often supported US hegemony and made the Global South
        structurally more open to US goods and finance (Gowan 1999). As time passed, there was variation in the Bank’s
        approach, mostly prompted by the failures of neoliberal austerity policies. The number of people living under
        the absurdly low $1 per day international poverty line increased in many regions. The 1980s were thus labelled
        the lost decade for developing countries, particularly those in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. For much
        of Africa, the debt crisis was not resolved until the late 1990s. In Latin America, where the 1980s debt relief
        schemes were targeted, growth remained low. The debt management processes also saw the Paris Club and
        multilaterals holding an increasing share of EMDE debt and the new loans they provided were often used to pay
        arrears on private sector debt.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        There were two early additions to the Washington Consensus to try to improve performance. One was <a class="item2"></a>good governance, which initially meant multi-party elections but was expanded to include
        anti-corruption initiatives and the adoption of Western budgetary and auditing systems. The second was a focus
        on <a class="item2"></a>poverty and minimalist social safety; arguably without some focus on poverty,
        neoliberalism was in danger of collapsing. In 1990, the World Bank’s influential World Development Report was
        grandly titled <em class="calibre4">Poverty</em> and on 31 December 1991, poverty appeared in the Bank’s mission statement
        (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). Poverty reduction is the neoliberal alternative to redistribution and social
        democratic welfare systems because it is a minimalist idea that defines equity and equality as getting people
        above the international poverty line – now at $1.90 a day – and no more. It posits that getting out of poverty
        mostly involves individual pursuit of increased productivity (Cammack 2004) and re-awakens the distinction
        between the deserving and undeserving poor. In 1990, the UN Human Development Reports first appeared too,
        demonstrating a re-emergence of the UN system in development space, as a timid challenger to World Bank.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The literature on the empirical and theoretical failures of the Washington Consensus increased over the 1990s.
        GDP in Latin America only returned to its pre-debt crisis level in 1993 (Kose et al. 2020). The IFIs ‘big bang’
        reform approach in the former Soviet Union was a failure as was their response to the 1997 Asian Financial
        Crisis. This 1990s debt wave was mostly in East Asia and some other emerging economies and was predominately
        caused by an upsurge in private sector debt following liberalisation and deregulation, while the Brady bonds
        created as part of the resolution of the Latin American debt crisis stimulated the development of sovereign
        bond markets in developing countries. In the case of the Asian Financial Crisis, former World Bank Chief
        Economist Joseph Stiglitz (2000, 60) concluded that the IMF’s response made the crisis ‘deeper, longer and
        harder.’ Sustained pressure on the Bank led it to claim by the late 1990s that it had moved beyond the
        Washington Consensus. What emerged, however, was merely a modified post-Washington Consensus.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        While neoliberalism reigned at the World Bank, in academia in the 1980s and 1990s there was a flourishing of
        critical development approaches. These came from eclectic fields: concerns about the negative impact on women
        of the development project evolved into a sophisticated literature on <a class="item2"></a>gender and
        development; the environmentalist movement expanded, focussing attention on sustainability; scholars and
        activists highlighted the importance of grassroots concerns and indigenous knowledges; structuralism and
        Critical Theory continued to unpick the material interests at work behind development interventions; and, and
        the post-development school inspired by Foucault and post-structuralism explained the extent to which
        development was a neo-colonial and Eurocentric project that needed to be challenged from the grassroots (Willis
        2005). The debate around gender, participation, and the environment were all taken up by the Bank, other MDBs,
        and the wider development community, though mostly in instrumentalist ways that ensured an expanded commitment
        to neoliberalism.
      </div>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.1.1 Key developments at the World Bank</h3>
<div class="item">
          At the World Bank, Reagan appointee Alden Winship Clausen ensured a neoliberal agenda was followed, though
          given that the organisation had been shaped by bankers, the shift was not always large (Engel and Bazbauers
          2020). The initial debt crisis response plan – the 1985 <a class="item2"></a>Baker Plan – involved the IFIs
          and private banks providing additional resources to debtor states in return for structural adjustment. The
          1989 <a class="item2"></a>Brady Plan also leveraged Bank resources and demanded further structural
          adjustment, so that the Bank became a key player in debt management (George and Sabelli 1994, Woods 2006).
          Developing country debt increased during the 1980s and more of it was owed to IFIs than to private sources
          (Bello 1994). Average annual Bank commitments grew from $5.36 billion in 1970–79 to $15.69 billion in 1980–89
          and $22.03 in 1990–95 (Kapur, Lewis, and Webb <a class="item2"></a>1997, 6), increasing Bank leverage over
          borrowing countries.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The World Bank’s environmental failings started coming home to roost during Clausen’s presidency. The
          infamous Polonoroeste project paving 1,500 kilometres of highway through Brazil’s Amazon resulted in mass
          deforestation and immiseration of the local Amerindian tribes. The bad press for the Bank was a factor in the
          establishment of its first environment department in 1987 (Rich 1994). That did not stop them financing the
          Narmada Sardar Sarovar dam in India starting in 1988 that produced one of the world’s largest social
          movements up to that time. Despite its very poor environmental track record, the Bank became one of the chief
          operational arms of the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) established in 1992. The issues of the MDBs and
          the environment are discussed further in <a class="item2">Chapter 10</a>. The Bank introduced an Inspection
          Panel in 1993 for project affected persons to have their concerns heard, with the US playing a key role in
          its establishment (Park 2017). Over the next decade, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, IADB, and EBRD
          all adopted similar accountability mechanisms due to a combination of US pressure, institutional isomorphism,
          and pressure from civil society organisations (Park 2014, Uhlin 2016). This is evidence of an interconnected
          MDB system.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The period from 1980 to 1997 saw three one-term World Bank Presidents – Clausen, Barber Conable, and Lewis
          Preston – and their key contributions and major events are outlined in <a class="item2">Table 4.1</a>.
        </div>
<table class="item8" width="98%">
<caption class="item9">
<a class="item2"></a><a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 4.1</em> World Bank Presidents 1981–95</a>
</caption>
<thead class="item10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<th class="item11">Name and term</th>
<th class="item11">Background</th>
<th class="item11">Legacy</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="calibre10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Alden Winship Clausen 1981–6</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended Carthage College and University of Minnesota, lawyer,
              banker.</td>
<td class="item12">Led the Bank during the 1980s recession and developing world debt crisis. Strong focus
              on neoliberal free markets, structural adjustment, and coordination with the IMF. These policies damaged
              the Bank’s global reputation. Priority investment areas were agriculture, energy, and sub-Saharan Africa.
              Introduced innovations in guarantees and co-financing with commercial banks. The Bank’s poor
              environmental standards became a focus of NGOs and media.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Barber Conable 1986–91</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, attended Cornell University, short legal career, long-term Republican
              politician first in New York state then House of Representatives.</td>
<td class="item12">
                The US’ refusal to ratify Clausen’s last budget forced Conable into a major, disruptive reorganisation,
                vacating all positions. The cuts reinforced dominance of neoliberal ideas in the Bank. He established
                the Bank’s first environment department in 1987 and started negotiations on the <a class="item2"></a>GEF. Conable gained approval for a large IBRD capital increase in 1988 and IFC in 1991.
                Strengthened focus on poverty but in ways that promoted privatisation and proletarianisation. The Bank
                became increasingly involved in debt management.
              </td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Name and term</td>
<td class="item12">Background</td>
<td class="item12">Legacy</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">Lewis Thompson Preston 1991–5</td>
<td class="item12">Born in US, served as a Marine during WWII, attended Harvard University, long banking
              career with JP Morgan.</td>
<td class="item12">Reaffirmed the Bank’s poverty focus and took a pragmatic, client-focused approach to
              management. Commissioned Wapenhans Report, which showed declining project quality inside the Bank.
              Established the Inspection Panel in 1993, and GEF had the Bank as a key administrator; Preston said
              development and environmental protection were complementary. Indigenous issues and resettlement gained
              attention after the disastrous Sardar Sarovar project in India; the Morse Commission report on it was
              prototype for the Inspection Panel. 24 new members joined IBRD and 20 IDA after collapse of USSR and many
              obtained loans.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<div class="source">
          Source: Compiled by authors from a range of sources, basic details from World Bank website (2019).
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.1.2 <a class="item6"></a>Key developments in other MDBs</h3>
<div class="item">
          Several MDBs were restructured in this era in response to either the debt crisis or the exigencies from the
          crises of the 1970s and the growth of globalised finance. Others, particularly the RDBs, became partners in
          pushing Washington Consensus policies on borrowing states (Babb 2009). Given the debt crisis centred on Latin
          America and the Caribbean, the IADB became a key player. In the Latin American RDB, there was a dramatic
          increase in their equivalent of adjustment programmes, indeed the US demanded that 25% of resources were
          devoted to such loans (Babb 2009, Kellerman 2019). There was also an increasing politicisation of lending
          policy, which regional member states protested with little success (Kellerman 2019). A large capital increase
          followed in 1988, so by 1994 it had become the region’s main source of development financing. The IADB added
          new private sector financing and insurance arms in this period too.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The SRDBs in the region struggled, with <abbr>CABEI</abbr> losing its ability to remain a regional
          member-only MDB (Cevallos 1996); the first non-regional members were Taiwan and Mexico in 1992 and Argentina
          and Colombia in 1995 and 1997. In 1990, <abbr>CAF</abbr> also started expanding its membership to include 12
          additional countries from Latin America and the Caribbean as well as Spain and Portugal and then 13 private
          regional banks because its ‘finances were in a precarious state’ (Humphrey 2016, 104). In order to renew its
          effectiveness and relevance, <abbr>CAF</abbr> restructured its corporate model to resemble the World Bank and
          IADB and hired consultants ‘from Coopers and Lybrand and a former World Bank vice president to review the
          <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s operations and make recommendations for overhauling internal process’ (Humphrey 2016,
          104).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Most of the African SRDBs were greatly affected by the economic downturn of the 1970s and this spilt over
          into the 1980s and even 1990s. Problems were compounded by failed member integration, lack of political
          commitment to regional actions, loan non-repayments worsening portfolio performance, reluctance to borrow
          from foreign donors, and deteriorating economic conditions in Southern Africa (Mistry and Kritzinger-van
          Niekerk 1998). The situation was so problematic for the <abbr>EADB</abbr> that it was almost dissolved during
          the late 1970s and early 1980s. The African SRDBs started admitting new members during the 1980s.
          Importantly, it was not just new non-regional member states but also MDBs, IFIs, national development banks,
          and even private banks, though the shareholdings tended to remain small.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The European-based MDBs were not particularly impacted by the debt crisis, and the Arab-led banks were
          setting up and expanding. The IsDB, in line with its distaste for conditionality, never offered structural
          adjustment programmes or policy-based lending (Kellerman 2019). Asia was also not hit particularly hard by
          the debt crisis and the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> slowly expanded, propelled by the addition of China as a borrower
          in 1986. The Asian RDB also started lending to the private sector in 1983, mirroring Washington Consensus
          trends. In regard to the specialised development banks, IFAD was restructured in 1995 making it more like the
          World Bank (Szasz 1999), and the NIB became a development group with the establishment of the Nordic
          Development Fund (<a class="item2"></a>NDF) in 1989, which is a regional financing mechanism linking Nordic
          countries to developing states.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">4.1.3 <a class="item6"></a>New MDBs</h3>
<div class="item">
          MDB creation slowed but did not come to a standstill during the Washington Consensus era; five new banks were
          created between 1980 and 1997, though the Development Bank of the States of Great Lakes (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>BDEGL</abbr>) established in 1980 was not operational long. It was another African SRDB
          founded to support a regional economic community, the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries. It was
          proposed in 1977 and became effective in 1980 and included two non-regional members: Belgium and the
          <abbr>AfDB</abbr> (The New Times 2009). Conflict between its regional member states of Rwanda, Burundi, and
          the Democratic Republic of the Congo led to its collapse in 1993. Discussions were held in 2009 about
          re-opening it but little seems to have happened.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The next MDB was the first of a sub-group of SRDBs focussed on trade and development, which combine the
          functions of an MDB with a multilateral version of national export-import banks. They are often focussed on
          regional infrastructure. The Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a>TDB) was established in 1985. It came out of African regional integration efforts, and then
          called the Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) of Eastern and Southern Africa – now called the Common Market
          for Eastern and Southern Africa – so it was initially called the PTA Bank. Southern Africa had remained
          outside earlier regional integration programmes but with Zimbabwe’s transition to majority rule in 1980, the
          door opened for expansion south.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The <a class="item2"></a>Pacific Islands Development Bank (PIDB) came next in 1989. It was established by a
          group of US-associated states in the Pacific, which worried that the US was going to end aid (Mak and Naya
          1994). Despite its name, it only covers Micronesia and not any of the Polynesian or Melanesian Pacific Island
          states. Most of those states were already members of the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, which has been the Pacific’s
          ‘principal multilateral development finance institution,’ even though most Polynesian and Melanesian states
          are also members of the World Bank (Mak and Naya 1994, 36).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Established in 1991, the EBRD came in the wake of the collapse of communism and at the height of neoliberal
          fervour. It has the most political and neoliberal aim of any MDB, which is ‘to foster the transition towards
          open market-oriented economies and to promote private and entrepreneurial initiative in the Central and
          Eastern European countries committed to and applying the principles of multiparty democracy, pluralism and
          market economics’ (EBRD 2013, 4). Indeed, the EBRD is the only MDB with an explicitly political mandate. Its
          region was extended to include Mongolia and the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean after 2006, which has
          expanded its lending. It has adopted a persona more alike a commercial bank than a traditional MDB (Babb
          2009), but it still operates as an MDB. It is the smallest of the RDBs but may benefit from an InvestEU
          programme that was being legislated in 2020.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The second trade and development bank of the period was the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank
          (<abbr>BSTDB</abbr>), which was established in 1997 and became operational in 1999. Like all SRDBs, it was
          linked to a regional cooperation forum and has as its first goal assisting the transition of member states
          towards economic prosperity as well as promoting regional projects and banking services. It originally
          thought that trade finance would be its bread and butter; however, its portfolio is dominated by project
          loans either directly or through financial intermediaries (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>BSTDB</abbr> 2019).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The continued growth of MDBs during this period demonstrates that they were not incompatible with
          neoliberalism, indeed the EBRD was a neoliberal-inspired creation. Still, most MDBs were bound up with
          postcolonial developmentalism and, as this slowed, so too did the creation of new banks.
        </div>
</section>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">4.2 The Post-Washington Consensus era: 1998–2009</h2>
<div class="item">
        The post-Washington Consensus era began following the Asian Financial Crisis and it saw a large shift in the
        global aid agenda with a big push for debt forgiveness and poverty reduction resulting in increasing the
        concessional resources available to developing countries and developing country ownership of development
        pathways through the Aid Effectiveness Agenda. Politically, the shift built on the rise of large progressive
        social movements and centre left parties like those of <a class="item2"></a>Bill Clinton in the US (1993–2001)
        and Tony Blair in the UK (1997–2007), whose minimally progressive agendas were friendly to globalisation
        (Mawdsley et al. 2018). Large social movements included the <a class="item2"></a>anti-globalisation movement
        peaking in the <a class="item2"></a>Battle for Seattle in 1999, the landmark protests in Cochabamba, Bolivia
        against <a class="item2"></a>privatised water price hikes in 2000, and the <a class="item2"></a>Make Poverty
        History coalition. Economically, the growth of China and relative stability globally meant many developing
        regions started to emerge from the austerity-induced recessions of the 1980s and early 1990s. It is a mistake,
        however, to think that there were no crashes: Brazil in 1999, the dotcom bubble burst of 2000, and Argentina in
        2001 were three of the largest and the pre-conditions for the next regional debt crisis began with the build-up
        of private sector debt in the US and Europe, leading to the GFC.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Ideationally, the MDBs drew mostly on the New Institutional Economics (NIE) strand of mainstream economics. NIE
        was an attempt to build on neoclassical economics by incorporating a theory of institutions (North 1998). By
        significantly expanding neoclassical analysis of market failures to include information failures and
        transaction costs, NIE produced a picture of markets as subject to extensive imperfections, in contrast to the
        neoliberal idea of perfectly functioning markets (Fine 2001, 2005). As Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) outlined,
        this means that government intervention could be efficient in many more cases than neoliberal doctrine allowed.
        Stiglitz was World Bank Chief Economist from 1997 to 2002 but was fired for his somewhat unorthodox views,
        though his influence lived on. His review of neoliberal ‘big bang’ capital market liberalisation concluded that
        if attention was not given to the order and timing of reform, programmes can cause more harm than good (Broad
        2004, Stiglitz 2002).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Beyond <a class="item2"></a>NIE, the <a class="item2"></a>Developmental State and Neostructuralist literature
        were important parts of the broader context of development thinking, drawing a critical eye on the failings of
        the Washington Consensus. The Developmental State literature, analysing the rapid post-war development of
        Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong, emerged in the early 1980s and had some impact on the
        post-Washington Consensus. This literature highlights that active states utilising macroeconomic and industrial
        policies, run by a developmental elite shielded to a degree from political competition, had been able to
        achieve high levels of industrial transformation and economic growth (Amsden 1989, Thurbon 2016, Wade 2018).
        One of the most successful development states, Japan, sought to have the World Bank acknowledge the role of the
        state and industrial policy in development, funding a Bank report titled <a class="item2"></a>The East Asian
        Miracle (1993) to recognise this. In the editing of the report, however, the role of the state was watered down
        to the point that the neoliberal development paradigm emerged unscathed (Wade 1996). Developmental States
        certainly influenced the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. Neostructuralism in Latin America similarly aimed to challenge
        neoliberal dogma but still cast market forces as the primary driver of development, adding that without
        attention to policy and institutional interventions focussed on equity, markets would not flourish (Leiva
        2008). Like the Development State literature, Neostructuralism created space for thinking about the role of the
        state in development, an important contributor to the unfolding post-Washington Consensus.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Despite these new approaches, the practice of the post-Washington Consensus generally extended the neoliberal
        approach to constraining the state in both <a class="item2"></a>monetary and fiscal policy and through
        devolution of power to statutory bodies like central banks (Carroll 2010, Engel 2010, Wade 2001,). Regulation
        and other mechanisms were utilised to create more space for private markets, not states. Curbing state – but
        not private sector – corruption became a major focus, which was linked to the existing good governance agenda,
        thus many MDB projects targeted ‘reform’ of government financial and auditing systems. In later years, the
        focus was on deepening marketisation through tendering out of activities once performed by the state in
        everything from infrastructure to healthcare, education, and welfare.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Still, the post-Washington Consensus had a stronger focus on absolute poverty reduction than its predecessor
        and some focus on the social costs of adjustment. It offered a more progressive approach to health and
        education investments by state and markets, though in practice did little to support these. The World Bank and
        other MDBs claimed to have abandoned one-size-fits-all approaches to development and created tailored country
        programmes, found in country programming documents. These frameworks were meant to be based on recipient
        government ideas as local ownership was a key element of the post-Washington Consensus.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The focus on <a class="item2"></a>poverty and local ownership was formalised in two international agreements
        that became a key part of the 2000s aid consensus. The first was the MDGs and the second the Aid Effectiveness
        Agenda. Both came out of the OECD <abbr>DAC</abbr> and, despite some progressive overtones, they represented
        the Global North shaping the global justice agenda. The OECD <abbr>DAC</abbr> started work in the area in 1995,
        but the work was initially done by a group of all male, rich country development politicians and bureaucrats
        whose focus was on practical issues of projects and policies, hence the use of results-based management with
        target-setting (Hulme 2009). Through years of politicking, a series of international development goals, as the
        <abbr>DAC</abbr> called them, evolved into the eight MDGs comprised of numerous targets and indicators approved
        by the UN Millennium Assembly held in <a class="item2"></a>2000. The MDGs became a unifying framework for the
        MDBs and former World Bank President James Wolfensohn referred to them in 2002 as ‘the hymnbook that we’re
        singing from now’ (cited in Bissio 2003, 157). Yet, as Saith (2006) argued, the MDGs were embedded in
        profoundly inegalitarian neoliberal relations and they sought not to change these, but only address the issue
        of absolute poverty. This is clear from the fact that the first MDG was to reduce the proportion of people
        living below the international poverty line of $1 a day, an accounting illusion that did not actually provide
        enough to allow people an average life expectancy (Hickel 2016).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The Aid Effectiveness Agenda emerged from the <abbr>DAC</abbr>, along with key statements made at High Level
        Forums in Rome (2003), Paris (2005), Accra (2008), and Busan (2011). The Agenda was a practical plan focussed
        on improving the quality and impact of aid policy and programmes and focussed on the practices of both donors
        and recipients. Ultimately a technocratic schedule devised by the Global North-led <abbr>DAC</abbr> (Booth
        2008), the OECD (2011) itself acknowledged that donors did not progress the agenda as much as recipients.
        Nonetheless, all the larger MDBs and several smaller ones participated in Aid Effectiveness programmes, 13 out
        of the then 28 MDBs aligning behind institutional standards of behaviour. Notably, a few of the Arab-led MDBs
        were involved in these programmes but none of the smaller African SRDBs and only one of the Latin American
        SRDBs, the <abbr>CDB</abbr>.
      </div>
</div>

<br/></div>