<div class="delete">

<h1 class="toc" id="chapter1"><a class="item2" href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter1">1 Introduction</a></h1>
<div class="item">
      When we started this book, our major motivator was to understand the role of the system of multilateral
      development banks (MDBs) in promoting both debt and development. Despite the 2007–8 <a class="item2" id="index_term439"></a>Global Financial Crisis (GFC), it was clear that debt was again rapidly building in many countries
      and that the development paradigm was shifting, partly thanks to Chinese influence. While scholars had written
      about the impact of some of the MDBs, it seemed odd to us that there was no comprehensive picture or analysis of
      the MDB system; and in this work, we identify 30 of them. Since commencing the book, COVID-19 emerged, which
      added a whole new level of urgency to our task because multilateral development finance (MDF) is a major source
      of finance for many Global South countries in their response to the health, social, and economic consequences of
      the pandemic. Debt build-up was a global concern prior to <a class="item2" id="index_term219"></a>COVID-19, with
      the <a class="item2" id="index_term1015"></a>World Bank calling the build-up in emerging markets and developing
      economies (<a class="item2" id="index_term356"></a>EMDEs) between 2010 and 2018, the ‘largest, fastest and most
      broad-based increase’ in the past half century (Kose et al. 2020, 111). Yet, states around the world, especially
      the poorest, need additional resources to limit the scale of the pandemic’s human tragedy.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      As the saying goes, we have seen this film before, and we know how it ends – with another debt crisis. In just
      the past four decades, the major crises have been the 1982 <a class="item2" id="index_term259"></a>Developing
      World Debt Crisis, 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, and 2007–8 GFC. Of course, history does not repeat itself and
      each crisis had specific drivers, features, and triggers but all involved a significant debt build-up,
      unregulated financial ‘innovations,’ and a trigger – often a banking or financial crisis, though this time it may
      be a virus.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The MDBs were key building blocks of the post-Second World War financial order and they have multiple ways they
      operate in that system (Culpeper <a class="item2" id="index_term64"></a>1997). They:
    </div>
<ol class="list-order">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
          Provide states with increased access to finance;
        </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
          Signal a state’s creditworthiness to private financiers and thus promote the expansion of private sector
          lending across the globe;
        </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
          ‘De-risk’ projects to bring in private finance;
        </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
          Advocate financial liberalisation by persuasively ‘educating’ policymakers and, when that fails by attaching
          coercive policy conditionalities to loans;
        </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
          Develop ‘innovative’ (i.e., risky) financial instruments to underpin their loans and encourage EMDEs to
          utilise them; and
        </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
          Expand debt relations within countries via policy diffusion, loans to governments and financial
          intermediaries, and projects supporting the financialisation of households.
        </div>
</li>
</ol>
<div class="item">
      The MDBs have been players in the handling of each new debt crisis. Yet, the <a class="item2" id="index_term693"></a>building blocks analogy is problematic because the international financial system does not have a
      solid foundation. The regulatory regime relies, on the one hand, on inter-state cooperation, which is
      increasingly hard to achieve, and, on the other hand, on rules for private finance that they have themselves
      established to suit their own interests. There is no orderly default mechanism for states.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The development banks have shaped thinking about what development means and how to go about it. The World Bank is
      a leader in this field. Over 25 years ago, George and Sabelli (1994, 5) compared the Bank’s role in development
      discourse to the medieval Christian church, arguing that it ‘has a doctrine, a rigidly structured hierarchy
      preaching and imposing this doctrine and a quasi-religious model of self-justification.’ There is still truth in
      that comparison; core elements of the neoliberal banking doctrine remain, though the Bank has evolved its
      thinking in a range of areas and understanding the detail is vital. What is less understood is how the 29 other
      MDBs operate: what are their similarities and differences? It is our hope to shed some light on these questions
      by exploring the system of MDBs.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      MDF is a mechanism through which regional and international organisations arrange loans, credits, and guarantees
      for investments in countries, generally with the aim of fostering economic growth. The MDBs are a key <a class="item2" id="index_term716"></a>source of MDF. All MDBs follow the mould of the World Bank, which commenced
      operations in 1946. Since then, their number and type have flourished. Regional, sub-regional, and specialised
      MDBs have emerged across the globe. While the flow of MDB creation turned to a trickle in the late 1970s, it did
      not stop, even in the neoliberal age of the 1980s on, which was seemingly hostile to the public facilitation of
      capital. Some banks have faced near-catastrophic challenges, but we have found only one MDB not currently
      operating, though it still exists on paper. So, here are further important questions: why do new MDBs keep
      getting created and why have they persisted? The two most recent MDBs established in the mid-2010s – the
      <abbr>BRICS</abbr>-led New Development Bank (<a class="item2" id="index_term691"></a>NDB) and China-led Asian
      Infrastructure Investment Bank (<a class="item2" id="index_term694"></a><abbr>AIIB</abbr>) – reignited debate on
      the MDBs and their role in the global order. And yet there is still no book-length study of the MDB system.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      To understand what the MDBs do, one need look no further than their name (Babb 2009, 6): their ownership is
      <em class="calibre4">multilateral</em>, in contrast to national development finance institutions (<a class="item2" id="index_term279"></a><abbr>DFI</abbr>s); they focus on <em class="calibre4">development</em>, taking a predominantly economic approach;
      and, they are <em class="calibre4">banks</em>, mainly providing loans and not grants like some other aid agencies. Most of the
      MDBs have charters – or Articles of Agreement, as they tend to be called – modelled upon the <a class="item2" id="index_term1016"></a>World Bank. <span id="pg_3"></span>They are organised as shareholding
      corporations, with the size of their capital bases determining their lending capacity. They originally
      prioritised lending for infrastructure but have come to work in a range of sectors. Our approach covers all MDBs.
      We do not make artificial distinctions between those working in the Global North and South as some research has
      done.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The staff of the World Bank and five regional development banks (<a class="item2" id="index_term828"></a>RDBs)
      number over 24,000. If we add in the 24 sub-regional and specialised development banks, that number would be
      closer to 30,000, which compares to the United Nation’s 44,000 employees but with a narrower field of operations.
      The MDBs also contract thousands of consultants and indirectly influence tens of thousands of recruits on the
      projects they fund. In 2018, the 30 MDBs in our study had a total capitalisation of over $1.3 trillion and some
      $222.7 billion in new lending commitments.<a class="item2" href="C08_chapter1_split_000.xhtml#fn1_1"><sup class="calibre7">1</sup></a> Many
      commentators like to point out that the scale of MDB loans relative to private markets is low (see Ahluwalia et
      al. 2016). There is some truth in that. According to the International Monetary Fund (<a class="item2" id="index_term619"></a>IMF), total global public and private debt reached $188 trillion in 2018. Still, the MDBs and
      other public <abbr>DFI</abbr>s ‘are the pin on which the upside down pyramid of investment is crowded in from the
      rest of the private sector and bilaterals, who are reassured that their risk is controllable because of the
      presence of IFI capital in a country, sector, project, company or bank. It is the underwriting function’ of MDBs
      that is vital to bilateral and private finance (Bracking 2009, 54).
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      Investments can often be beneficial to a state’s development, but debt-based operations are more complicated.
      Debt is a ‘matter of morality’ (Graeber 2014, 8). Debt predated money but as bullion money became the basis for
      daily human relations, debt became something else, something unlike any other obligation thanks to the fact that
      it ‘can be precisely quantified. This allows debts to become simple, cold, and impersonal – which, in turn,
      allows them to be transferable’ (Graeber 2014, 13). Yet, despite often horrific and violent consequences, debt
      relations have expanded at an incredible pace since the <a class="item2" id="index_term870"></a>Second World War
      and particularly since the financial liberalisation of the 1970s that went along with the rise of neoliberalism.
      The rapidity with which <a class="item2" id="index_term236"></a>debt was again pushed on states and people and
      hailed as the solution to poverty, low growth rates, and even climate adaptation after the GFC was astonishing.
      <a class="item2" id="index_term404"></a>Financial innovation and financialisation are again on the rise, with the
      latter being ‘where the financial sector grows faster, or appropriates a larger share of profits than,
      manufacturing or trading in goods and services’ (Gabor 2018, 1).
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The rest of this chapter is occupied, first, with outlining our somewhat eclectic theoretical framework, which is
      influenced by both <a class="item2" id="index_term699"></a>Critical Theory and Constructivism. Our book is deeply
      informed by our theoretical engagement, but as a text on the entire MDB system we have a lot of material to
      cover, thus we keep our theoretical musings short. The second part of this chapter defines what we mean by MDF
      and the MDBs and explains how we have catego<a class="item2" id="index_term733"></a>rised the MDB system. In this
      process, we outline the structure of the book and the key questions driving it.
    </div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5"><span class="calibre8" id="pg_4"></span>1.1 Theorising the MDBs: <a class="item6" id="index_term700"></a>Critical Theory and Constructivism</h2>
<div class="item">
        The MDBs embody a set of theoretical ideas and their work is framed by sets of beliefs and ideas too. As John
        Maynard Keynes (1973, 383), the lead theoretical architect of the MDB system, famously put it, even
        ‘[p]ractical men [and women] who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influence, are
        usually the slaves of some defunct economist.’ This book is a collaboration of two scholars of International
        Relations (IR), or more precisely from the field of International Political Economy (IPE), meaning we have a
        strong focus <strong class="calibre2">on</strong> the international level and the intersection of politics and economics. The
        MDBs are important case studies in this regard. Indeed, there are only a handful of other formal international
        organisations (<a class="item2" id="index_term622"></a>IOs) that are as important to this intersection as the
        MDBs.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        While the authors of this book share an overarching IPE framework, we diverge in theoretical approach. Susan
        Engel adopts a neo-Gramscian/Critical Theory lens and Adrian Robert Bazbauers draws on <a class="item2" id="index_term202"></a>Constructivism and Organisational Sociology. Both of us have seriously engaged with each
        other’s approach and we consider there is overlap between the two approaches but equally that theoretical
        eclecticism is a strength.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The three core tenets broadly uniting Constructivist IR (see Copeland 2006, Park 2018, Wendt 1995) can be
        explored to reveal commonalities and differences with neo-Gramscian scholarship. First, Constructivism seeks to
        understand global social relations. While mainstream IR/IPE theories Neo-realism and Neo-liberalism attempt to
        predict causal outcomes, Constructivism seeks to understand social interactions. The Italian neo-Marxist
        Antonio Gramsci (1971) does have moments in his writing where he tends to determinism (Anderson 1976), but, as
        with contemporary neo-Gramscian scholarship, Susan focusses on Gramsci’s historicist mode (Engel 2010). Thus
        both approaches share a focus on social relations, but a neo-Gramscian account interrogates how elites
        construct hegemonic power and how working classes might progress positive social change and human well-being
        (Engel 2010, Rupert 1998).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The second core tenet uniting Constructivism is the view that the world is socially constructed through the
        social relations of actors sharing intersubjective meanings; ideas, rules, and norms are constitutive and shape
        actor behaviour appropriate for their fields, a point explored by Adrian in analyses of the World Bank
        (Bazbauers 2016, 2018, 2019a, 2019b). Gramsci had similar concerns in his analysis of hegemony, focussing on
        leadership, alliances, and networks as well as ideas and ideology, which not only organise human action and
        thought but frequently produce a reductionist ‘common sense’ (Gramsci 1971, Simon 1991). Norms, which
        Constructivists label standards ‘of appropriate behavior for actors with a given identity’ (Finnemore and
        Sikkink 1998, 891), certainly have much overlap with Gramscian scholarship, although neo-<a class="item2" id="index_term443"></a>Gramscians contend that this literature lacks sufficient engagement with power and does not
        give enough attention to the <a class="item2" id="index_term235"></a>social relations of production (Wills
        2017).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Constructivism’s third common tenet is that <a class="item2" id="index_term234"></a>non-material factors are
        positioned above material ones in understanding <a class="item2" id="index_term231"></a>global social
        relations. Constructivist IR <span id="pg_5"></span>does not dismiss material factors entirely, however. Wendt
        (1999, 96) argued that ‘brute material facts’ exist, constraining but not determining ideational factors; it is
        ‘not ideas all the way down.’ The contrast with the <a class="item2" id="index_term233"></a>material-focussed
        Neo-realism and Neo-liberalism is clear. For Constructivists, material features exist, but their meaning is
        shaped through social action producing intersubjective understandings. Gramsci’s approach to the material and
        non-material is best understood through his concept of the ‘historic bloc,’ which is Gramsci’s term to explain
        how dominant groups predominate for long periods (Simon 1991). Historic blocs emerge from the production and
        the distribution of goods and services but are also based in culture, religion, theory, and ideology (Lears
        1985), in other words there is a dialectical relationship between the material and non-material. Gramsci took a
        dynamic approach to studying historic blocs and encouraged attention to both short-term non-structural changes
        and long-term structural changes. Overall, while both approaches share an interest in the <a class="item2" id="index_term448"></a>material and non-material, material interests are more prominent in neo-Gramscian analysis.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Applied to the MDBs, our approaches view the IOs as embedded in broader social orders, in our case a focus on
        their role in debt dynamics as a way they reproduce contemporary social relations. The reader will see that
        Susan’s neo-Gramscian view of debt relations as capitalist and often exploitative frames much of the analysis
        on this issue. The shared concern with ideas means that the book engages extensively with the development
        paradigms at play in the MDBs at the macro, meso, and micro levels, trying to both deconstruct them and
        understand their relationship to practices that might best progress human well-being. Adrian’s Constructivist
        analysis emphasises the role of internal organisational traits – like bureaucratic and normative structures –
        and external institutional characteristics – such as social networks and intersubjective meanings shared within
        MDF – and is visible in the study of the individual MDBs and how they constitute a system.
      </div>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">1.1.1 The MDBs from a Critical Theory perspective</h3>
<div class="item">
          Key ontological and epistemological priorities of a neo-<a class="item2" id="index_term444"></a>Gramscian
          approach are outlined above. One concept, however, needs further explanation: hegemony. Hegemony occurs when
          a dominant class builds an effective historic bloc that controls the social system predominantly through
          consent rather than coercion and force (Cox 1983, Gill and Law 1993). A hegemonic system sees subservient
          classes acceding to the dominant one because of their consent to practices and ideologies established by the
          dominant class, which restrict alternatives, frame thought, and instil legitimacy, thus establishing a
          ‘common sense’ for all members of a community (Cox 1992). Hegemonic common sense can be resisted, however,
          and an historic bloc can breakdown through (i) an <a class="item2" id="index_term476"></a>‘organic crisis’
          that destroys the social, economic, and political relations of a hegemonic system, (ii) a <a class="item2" id="index_term477"></a>‘passive revolution’ by the dominant group from above to resist potentially
          transformative change, and (iii) the actions of a <a class="item2" id="index_term475"></a>counter-hegemonic
          movement, whereby subaltern classes undermine the historic bloc (Morton 2007, Murphy 2005, Rupert 1998).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Robert Cox (1986, 1996, 1992, 1983) was one of the first scholars to apply Gramsci’s concepts to the global
          arena, constructing a schema to analyse <a class="item2" id="index_term445"></a>hegemonic and non-hegemonic
          forces globally by considering the levels of social forces, states, and world orders. At the level of world
          orders, the <a class="item2" id="index_term447"></a>historic bloc concept is deployed as a transnational
          entity. These are organic, involve more than one class, and include ‘government institutions and civil
          societies of a number of countries including weak states’ (Gill 1986, 211). IOs play a significant role in
          world orders, legitimising hegemonic norms, co-opting the elites of developing countries, and absorbing
          counter-hegemonic narratives (Cox 1986). Given that ‘world hegemony is thus in its beginnings an outward
          expansion of the internal (national) hegemony established by a dominant social class’ (Cox 1996, 137),
          neo-Gramscian analyses of IOs have tended to emphasise the role played by the <a class="item2" id="index_term627"></a>US and <em class="calibre4">pax Americana</em> in establishing global governance actors like the World Bank and
          <a class="item2" id="index_term620"></a>IMF and the role such <a class="item2" id="index_term623"></a>IOs
          play in securing a transnational historic bloc designed to reinforce US intellectual and cultural hegemony,
          notably on economic policy. Susan’s earlier work on the World Bank took this approach (Engel 2010); however,
          she has shifted views somewhat, influenced by work challenging the <a class="item2" id="index_term479"></a>state-centric conception of hegemony, which argues it is increasingly incompatible with a
          globalised world. It is vital to move towards a transnational framing that recognises horizontal connections
          between social forces across and between national and transnational institutions (Robinson 2005, 2015).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          This approach helps to explain the emergence of the two new MDBs: the <a class="item2" id="index_term695"></a><abbr>AIIB</abbr> and <a class="item2" id="index_term692"></a>NDB. While the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>
          do reflect shifting structural power at the level of world orders (see Bond 2016 for a summary of analyses),
          a transnational capitalist approach highlights that the MDBs do not challenge the ideational base of the
          world order. Indeed, they support it. At best, as Stephen (2014, 914) argues, the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> ‘pose a
          within-system challenge to global governance: they challenge its most liberal content, while becoming
          dependent on, and engaging with, its existing institutional structures.’ Such a within-system challenge may
          produce a more multipolar, diverse international system, but it is unlikely to displace the inegalitarian
          order itself (Robinson 2014); variability in the system does not mean the historic bloc is being
          substantively challenged. This is not to say that states are irrelevant. Significantly, the US retains quite
          a degree of power over the World Bank and several other MDBs and has not been willing to relinquish that
          control and ‘<a class="item2" id="index_term127"></a><abbr>BRICS</abbr> capitalism exhibits a greater role
          for state regulation and public sectors… What this simply tells us is that “varieties of capitalism” produce
          “varieties of integration” into global capitalism’ (Robinson 2015, 17–18).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          This brings us to one final point: the global system has been managing structural crisis resulting from
          capitalism’s tendency to overaccumulation and the resultant inequality for some time, but the crisis is
          becoming more acute. One of the <a class="item2" id="index_term1017"></a>World Bank’s key roles was to ensure
          that capital was provided where it was most needed, initially in the context of capital shortages. However,
          as the Keynesian, modernisation, welfare model was overturned, inequalities increased (Piketty 2014) and the
          propensity for capital to accumulate more rapidly than could be productively reinvested in the production or
          exchange of goods and services grew (Harvey 2005, 2010, Soederberg 2006). The MDB system is supportive of the
          ways capitalism has tended to deal with crisis. Harvey (2010) identified three key avenues. One is a spatial
          fix, meaning geographical expansion and spatial reorganisation. Here the <a class="item2" id="index_term711"></a>growth and expansion of the MDBs has allowed the greater penetration of economies that would not
          normally be regarded as ‘bankable.’ A second fix is temporal – excess capital is invested into long-term
          activities, which take many years before returning capital to circulation. Infrastructural investments by the
          MDBs are classic examples of this and the current focus of the MDBs on de-risking projects for the private
          sector rather than investing themselves facilitates greater reach. The third fix is where the preceding two
          intertwine: ‘spatio-temporal’ fixes. Again, MDB projects do this, including signalling investment feasibility
          to private capital; the capacity to influence capital markets and shape government policy is of greater
          consequence than the money the MDBs lend.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">1.1.2 The MDBs from a <a class="item6" id="index_term698"></a>Constructivist perspective</h3>
<div class="item">
          Constructivism is not a substantive theory of international politics but rather an attempt to understand
          social relations and the fluid intersections between the global, regional, and national. Drawing from
          sociology, Constructivism sees social reality as built on collective understandings produced and reproduced
          by people; ‘people always construct, or constitute, social reality, even as their being, which can only be
          social, is constructed for them’ (Onuf 1989, 1) – hence the term ‘Constructivism.’
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In understanding the behaviour of IOs, Constructivist IR/IPE is often positioned in contrast to the
          rationalist principal-agent model. The model proposes that principals, such as states, delegate authority to
          agents, such as IOs, to perform tasks for the principal thereby maximising benefits and reducing costs for
          the principal (Snidal and Tamm 2018). Beyond ontological and epistemological distinctions, a central
          difference between the two relates to the autonomy of IOs from their principals. Whereas the <a class="item2" id="index_term626"></a>principal-agent model argues that ‘member governments <em class="calibre4">sometimes</em>
          empower their IO agents with real decision-making authority’ (Nielson and Tierney 2003, 242 emphasis added),
          Constructivists tend to regard IOs as far more autonomous.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Barnett and Finnemore (1999) argued that IOs have their own bureaucracies and authority and are thus
          empowered to act autonomously of their principals. IO autonomy is significant in recognising that the MDBs
          are not simply artefacts controlled by shareholders but are capable of exercising their own authority (Snidal
          and Tamm 2018). While the US is influential in the World Bank, even there its power varies over time and by
          issue. In the <a class="item2" id="index_term129"></a>MDB system, the distribution of internal shareholder
          power varies greatly too, as does the relative power of shareholders to influence their MDBs. This creates an
          opportunity to explore in detail the <a class="item2" id="index_term624"></a>autonomy of the MDBs relative to
          their principals (Humphrey and Michaelowa 2013), especially when analysing the institutionalisation of
          behavioural norms in the MDF architecture (Hanlon 2017, 546).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
<span id="pg_8"></span>The focus of Constructivism <a class="item2" id="index_term232"></a>on institutional
          fields derives from Organisational Sociology and seeks to understand IOs not just in terms of inter-state
          relations but in reference to organisational dynamics and their broader social relations in producing and
          reproducing intersubjective meanings (Koch and Stetter 2013). This has led to a central focus on
          institutions, which Scott (2008, 48) defines as ‘comprised of regulative, normative, and cultural-cognitive
          elements that… provide stability and meaning to social life.’ An institutional field is the architecture of
          procedures, routines, norms, and conventions that surround organisations within their field. For the MDBs,
          this means the institutional field of MDF, which they, in turn, shape. A key insight coming out of the
          literature that is very relevant to the MDB system is the <a class="item2" id="index_term525"></a>process of
          institutional isomorphism – this work highlights how IO operations become normalised and their organisational
          behaviour and culture similar over time due to social influence, coercive and persuasive forces, and
          socialisation (Acharya 2009, Finnemore and Sikkink 1998, 2001, Park 2006, 2014).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Constructivist IPE aligns with new institutionalism, which is comprised of numerous theoretical strands (see
          Lowndes and Roberts 2010), of which the sociological variant is the most relevant here. New institutionalism
          posits that organisational behaviour is not reducible to rational or functional pursuits (Bell 2011, DiMaggio
          1998). Organisations of course need to ensure their own effectiveness, but the drive to demonstrate
          legitimacy is, in fact, more important (Frandsen and Johansen 2013). Organisational convergence derives from
          the pursuit of legitimacy, an end-state facilitated by the production and reproduction of social facts
          through institutional isomorphism. Three forces drive institutionalisation (DiMaggio and Powell 1983, 150–2):
          (i) <a class="item2" id="index_term526"></a>coercive isomorphism derives from formal pressures, such as legal
          regulations, exerted on actors to conform to prescribed behaviour; (ii) <a class="item2" id="index_term527"></a>mimetic isomorphism arises in places of industry ambiguity leading new organisations to model
          themselves on more established organisations; and, (iii) <a class="item2" id="index_term528"></a>normative
          isomorphism relates to professional and occupational standards that produce conformity in an industry. These
          forces are all visible in MDF and help the MDBs demonstrate their legitimacy and thus survival.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Institutional processes are not passive. Power relations pervade institutional structures and not only are
          such structures powerful in conditioning behaviour, but organisations exercise power in shaping their
          institutional fields (Lawrence and Buchanan 2017); Constructivists regard this as the production and
          reproduction of social facts. The World Bank, for example, has exercised considerable influence in shaping
          MDF. Further, isomorphic processes are not neat and tidy. Organisations adapt and change in often difficult
          and confusing ways, contingent upon internal organisational exigencies and rational bureaucratic factors.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          IOs are thus defined by their formal bureaucratic structures and juridical personalities as well as their
          social embeddedness in global institutional fields (Abdenur and Folly 2015). Further, the staff employed by
          them are socialised and normalised into the formal and informal practices of their organisations while also
          being sought by IOs for their expertise, experience, and socialised skills necessary to align with
          organisational and institutional priorities (Malkin and <span id="pg_9"></span>Momani 2016). IO staff members
          emerge from and are socialised within communities of practice (Haas 1992), or are sought out as they already
          possess beliefs derived from their training and experience in related organisations. Demonstrating linkages
          to neo-Gramscian thought, we can say that those employed by MDBs are part of a transnational technocratic
          elite institutionalised within particular normative frameworks (Robinson 2015).
        </div>
</section>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">1.2 Structure of the book</h2>
<div class="item">
        MDF involves regional and international organisations arranging loans, credits, and guarantees for investment
        in economic development. The focus on <em class="calibre4">multilateral</em> finance means we exclude bilateral finance provided
        by states to other states and to the private sector for development purposes. This, unfortunately, means
        excluding some quite important areas of development finance, including:
      </div>
<ol class="list-order">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
            Government-sponsored or quasi-governmental export credit agencies (ECAs, sometimes called export-import
            banks): these provide credit, insurance, and guarantees to facilitate a country’s exports. ECAs preceded
            the MDBs – as outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a> – and they operate in around 85 countries today.
            They are significant creditors to EMDEs, they work with the MDBs, and they are a key part of the broader
            <abbr>DFI</abbr> network that few scholars have explored, one exception being Bracking (2009).
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
            Bilateral aid agencies that include loan programmes in their development assistance. The US initially
            developed loan schemes in a de facto form through the 1954 <a class="item2" id="index_term18"></a>Agricultural Trade and Development Assistance Act, which allowed local currency repayment for
            US agricultural products. In 1957, the US established the <a class="item2" id="index_term280"></a>Development Loan Fund, which has been through several titles and seemed in danger of being
            defunded, but competition from China saw the US establish the International Development Finance Corporation
            in 2019. A range of other <a class="item2" id="index_term86"></a>bilateral aid agencies also provide loans,
            including established donors – such as Japan and Germany – and some new ones, like Thailand.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="list">
            Domestic development banks: these generally commenced with a domestic mandate but have expanded to provide
            development finance to other states as well. The <abbr>BRICS</abbr> have become important players in this
            area. The China Development Bank, for example, is twice the size of the World Bank and has increasingly
            engaged in cross-border projects, as has the large Brazilian Development Bank (<a class="item2" id="index_term107"></a><abbr>BNDES</abbr>). The MDBs sometimes lend to <a class="item2" id="index_term292"></a>domestic development banks as financial intermediaries.
          </div>
</li>
</ol>
<div class="item">
        The function of the MDBs as lenders and guarantors evolved out of the long history of debt, money, inter-state
        lending, and inter-state cooperation. This is the focus of <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a>, which offers a brief
        <em class="calibre4">longue durée</em> record of these topics. The direct ancestors of the MDBs are the ECAs, set up in the
        Global North just after the turn of the 20th century, to assist exporters but their focus on geostrategic
        <span id="pg_10"></span>allies and former colonies led them to have a developmental element. Further, US
        financial cooperation with Latin America included discussions on forming an inter-American bank from the late
        1880s and in 1939 a Mexican delegation proposed that this bank should channel investment to promote economic
        development in the Americas (Villaseñor 1941). Thus, <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a> demonstrates that, rather
        than being an American idea, the MDBs may well be a Mexican one. Still, the first MDB did not come into being
        until the US was behind the idea at the 1944 <a class="item2" id="index_term108"></a>Bretton Woods Conference,
        where the establishing agreement of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) –
        alongside its ‘sibling,’ the IMF – was signed.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapters 3</a> and <a class="item2">4</a> tell the story of the <a class="item2" id="index_term732"></a>evolution of the 31 MDBs, 30 of which are functional (see <a class="item2" href="C08_chapter1_split_000.xhtml#tab1_1">Table 1.1</a>). <a class="item2">Chapter 3</a> starts in 1946, when the <a class="item2" id="index_term564"></a>IBRD – today known as the World Bank, alongside its concessional arm, the International
        Development Association (<a class="item2" id="index_term580"></a>IDA) – became operational and outlines the key
        issues and debates that shaped its creation. It explores the expansion of the MDB system from 1956 to 1979,
        when a further 21 MDBs were founded. The early growth of the MDB system is linked to the post-war Keynesian,
        welfare, modernisation model (Fine 2001) and the mandates of most MDBs from this period reflect this. The
        chapter concludes with the first major post-war debt crisis, the 1982 Debt Crisis, demonstrating on the MDBs
        relationship with, and response to, debt.
      </div>
<table class="item8" width="98%">
<caption class="item9">
<a class="item2" id="tab1_1"><em class="calibre4">Table 1.1</em> Development banks by type</a>
</caption>
<thead class="item10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<th class="item11">Decade</th>
<th class="item11">Specialised</th>
<th class="item11">Regional</th>
<th class="item11">Sub-regional</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="calibre10">
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">2010s</td>
<td class="item12">Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (2015) New Development Bank (2014)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">2000s</td>
<td class="item12">Eurasian Development Bank (2006) ECO Trade and Development Bank (2005)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">1990s</td>
<td class="item12">European Bank for Reconstruction and Development(1991)</td>
<td class="item12">Black Sea Trade and Development Bank (1997)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">1980s</td>
<td class="item12">Pacific Islands Development Bank (1989) Eastern and Southern African Trade and
            Development Bank (1985) Development Bank of the States of Great Lakes (1980)<sup class="calibre7">a</sup></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">1970s</td>
<td class="item12">International Fund for Agricultural Development (1977) OPEC Fund for International
            Development (1976) Nordic Investment Bank (1976) Islamic Development Bank (1974) Arab Bank for Economic
            Development in Africa (1974) Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (1971)</td>
<td class="item12">ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development (1975) Development Bank of Central African
            States (1975) FONPLATA Development Bank (1974) West African Development Bank (1973) International
            Investment Bank (1970) Development Bank of Latin America (1970) Caribbean Development Bank (1970)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">1960s</td>
<td class="item12">Asian Development Bank (1966) African Development Bank (1963)</td>
<td class="item12">East African Development Bank (1967) International Bank for Economic Cooperation (1963)
            Central American Bank for Economic Integration (1960)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">1950s</td>
<td class="item12">Council of Europe Development Bank (1956)</td>
<td class="item12">Inter-American Development Bank (1959) European Investment Bank (1958)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre9">
<td class="item12">1945</td>
<td class="item12">World Bank (global)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<div class="source">
<sup class="calibre7">a</sup> No longer functional.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapter 4</a> analyses the period from 1980 to 2020, an era when a further eight
        still-functional MDBs were established. The focus is again on the inter-relationships between the MDBs,
        geopolitics, debt, and development discourse. The chapter thus explores the evolution of neoliberalism, which
        came to dominate thinking in the World Bank and many other MDBs, particularly in the policy prescriptions they
        suggested to developing countries between 1980 and 1997, a period known as the Washington Consensus era. With
        the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, hardline Washington Consensus prescriptions were discredited and, in the
        attempt to revitalise neoliberal development discourse, the post-Washington Consensus era began. It combined
        some core neoliberal ideas with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and a global interest in poverty
        alleviation to produce a small window of time where the global development agenda was somewhat more progressive
        and human centred. However, this period closed with the 2008 GFC and was replaced with the retroliberal
        development agenda (Murray and Overton 2016) and the re-emergence of a more state-centric, nationalist
        discourse promoting debt-not-grants and an excessive focus on infrastructural investment.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapter 5</a> examines the formal structure of the MDBs, using the World Bank as a model. It
        delves into how their structures have shaped them as organisations, exploring voting rights and capital
        subscriptions. We highlight how the MDBs need to issue bonds on international capital markets to raise funds,
        which has given capital markets and credit rating agencies considerable influence over them. The banking and
        development agendas of the MDBs frequently conflict, with banking norms often taking precedence. The chapter
        also explores governance structures and loan types, terms, and conditions. Despite the rapid growth in private
        finance since the 1980s, many private financiers will not lend to low-income countries and there are many
        projects that they will not fund in middle- and high-income countries because of perceived financial risk, thus
        the MDBs persist and new ones have been created.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapters 6</a> through <a class="item2">8</a> analyse the key features, priorities, and
        frameworks of the 29 MDBs established after the World Bank. Loosely adapting Wihtol’s (2014) typology, we
        divide the MDBs into regional, sub-regional, and specialised development banks. The RDBs are ‘regional’ in that
        their mandates support African, Asian, Latin American, and European development, collaboration, and
        integration. The sub-regional development banks (SRDBs) resemble the RDBs, except that they are typically much
        smaller and serve sub-regions, such as East Africa or the Caribbean. The specialised banks are more disparate
        but are unified as niche development financiers; for example, they finance agricultural interventions or
        provide Islamic development finance.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapter 6</a> focusses on the RDBs, the first of which was the European Investment Bank (EIB)
        in 1958, a product of the fast-evolving post-war European integration project. <a class="item2" id="index_term379"></a>EIB was quickly followed by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) in 1959 from Latin America.
        The African Development Bank (<a class="item2" id="index_term2"></a><abbr>AfDB</abbr>) was established in 1964,
        emerging remarkably quickly after post-war African decolonisation; between the 1940s and 1960s, the number of
        independent African states increased from a handful to over 30. The Asian Development Bank (<abbr>AsDB</abbr>),
        founded in 1966, was more a case of a regional power – Japan – pushing the creation of an MDB. <a class="item2">Chapter 6</a> also examines the outlier in RDB creation – the European Bank for Reconstruction and
        Development (<a class="item2" id="index_term367"></a>EBRD), established in 1991 at the height of the Washington
        Consensus era with the aim of assisting the post-Cold War transition of Soviet states from communism to
        capitalism.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapter 7</a> turns to the 15 <a class="item2" id="index_term906"></a>SRDBs, which Culpeper
        (1997, 54) described as a ‘stratum’ of MDBs ‘that lies below the regional banks; they generally serve a group
        of borrowers that share borders or geographical or other characteristics and that stand apart from their
        neighbours in other ways.’ We would add that they were frequently the product of a concern that capital needs
        were not being met by the World Bank and RDBs and, notably in sub-Saharan Africa, were often the financial arms
        of formal sub-regional groups. There are some success stories among them, such as the Development Bank of Latin
        America (<abbr>CAF</abbr>) today rivalling the <a class="item2" id="index_term533"></a>IADB in Latin America,
        but also stories of failure – the Development Bank of the States of Great Lakes (<a class="item2" id="index_term276"></a><abbr>BDEGL</abbr>) collapsed in 1993 due to conflict between its members.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapter 8</a> covers the nine specialised banks. These MDBs either have memberships that do
        not fall along regional lines or have a specialised focus on an area of development, like agriculture or
        infrastructure. The largest group of these banks is one that we broadly call the ‘Arab-led MDBs’: the Arab Fund
        for Economic and Social Development (<a class="item2" id="index_term36"></a><abbr>AFESD</abbr>), Arab Bank for
        Economic Development in Africa (<a class="item2" id="index_term21"></a><abbr>BADEA</abbr>), Islamic Development
        Bank (IsDB), and <a class="item2" id="index_term783"></a>OPEC Fund for International Development (<a class="item2" id="index_term644"></a>IsDB). With Arab countries as their largest shareholders, they emerged from
        pressure imposed on oil exporters after the <a class="item2" id="index_term781"></a>1973 oil price shock to
        expand their international contributions and they did this partly through MDBs. The specialised banks also
        include the two most recent entrants to the MDB system: first, the NDB, which was established in 2014 and whose
        membership is currently limited to the five <abbr>BRICS</abbr> countries, and, second, the China-led
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr> established in 2015 that prioritises infrastructural investments.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapters 9</a> through <a class="item2">11</a> explore three of the main areas of MDB
        operations: <a class="item2" id="index_term712"></a>infrastructure, climate finance, and human development. As
        <a class="item2">Chapter 9</a> outlines, infrastructure has always been central to the MDBs. It was a key
        concern after the destruction of the <a class="item2" id="index_term871"></a>Second World War and underpinned
        the Keynesian, welfare, modernisation model. While declining in importance as human needs entered development
        discourse, it regained its top spot during the current retroliberal era. Infrastructure is vitally important
        for development but at the same time it is a complicated field. Large projects mean complexity and the
        likelihood of technical errors, mismanagement, and corruption goes up, as do environmental and social
        consequences. Problematic infrastructure projects were the key drivers of the MDBs establishing safeguard
        policies and inspection panels. The retroliberal push for increased infrastructure funding could be very useful
        for some countries, but is equally likely to provide many failures, leaving a debt legacy that will last many
        years.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapter 10</a> analyses the development of MDB <a class="item2" id="index_term702"></a>environmental policies and lending programmes. Despite their culpability in a range of what can
        only be described as environmental disasters up to the 1980s, the MDBs are now prominent financial agencies in
        a range of environmental initiatives, including the Global Environment Facility (<a class="item2" id="index_term437"></a>GEF). Certainly, on paper at least, their environmental policies and safeguards are among the best
        in the world, but as mainstream development financiers they have taken a long time to reduce their portfolios
        of carbon projects. Further, the MDBs have promoted the use of innovative financial instruments to expand the
        climate finance regime. While these instruments may be built on strong financial structures, questions emerge
        whether they are well suited to assist countries adapt, mitigate, and build resilience to climate change.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2">Chapter 11</a> discusses human development, focussing on education, health, and gender. Prior
        to the 1970s, most MDBs had not funded social projects as they preferred investments with easily quantifiable
        economic returns. With the introduction of basic needs, absolute and relative poverty, and <a class="item2" id="index_term481"></a>human development to development discourse, the MDBs slowly began to broaden
        their understanding of development. Yet, the small percentage that the MDBs allocated to fund such projects
        prioritised investing in people to improve their productive capacity not improving their quality of life.
        Further, the MDBs only belatedly – and somewhat reluctantly – came to acknowledge the role of women in
        development starting in the 1980s, which evolved into gender policies, programmes, and safeguards. While
        considerable strides have been made over the past few decades, the MDBs continue to approach gendered
        inequalities as problems that can be ‘fixed’ through the application of the right resources, focussing on
        creating economic opportunities for women and not addressing structural gendered imbalances.
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">Note</h2>
<ol class="none">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="endnote">
<a class="item2" id="fn1_1">1</a> In this study, $ = US dollars, € = Euros, £ = British pounds, and any
            other currencies are as specified.
          </div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>
<ol class="biblioentrylist">
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Abdenur, Adriana Erthal, and Maiara Folly. 2015. “The New Development Bank and the Institutionalization of
            the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>.” <em class="calibre4">R/evolutions</em> 3:66–92.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Acharya, Amitav. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Whose Ideas Matter? Agency and Power in Asian Regionalism</em>. New York:
            Cornell University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Ahluwalia, Montek Singh, Lawrence Summers, Andrés Velasco, Nancy Birdsall, and Scott Morris. 2016.
            <em class="calibre4">Multilateral Development Banking for This Century’s Development Challenges: Five Recommendations to
            Shareholders of the Old and New Multilateral Development Banks</em>. Washington, DC: Centre for Global
            Development.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Anderson, Perry. 1976. “The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci.” <em class="calibre4">New Left Review</em> 100:5–78.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Babb, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Behind the Development Banks: Washington Politics, World Poverty, and the Wealth of
            Nations</em>. Chicago, IL and London: The University of Chicago Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Barnett, Michael, and Martha Finnemore. 1999. “The Politics, Power, and Pathologies of International
            Organizations.” <em class="calibre4">International Organization</em> 53 (4):699–732.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2016. “The World Bank as a Development Teacher.” <em class="calibre4">Global Governance</em> 22
            (3):409–26.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2018. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and Transferring Development: Policy Movement through
            Technical Assistance</em>, <em class="calibre4">International Political Economy Series</em>. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2019a. “The Relational Dynamics of World Bank Survey Missions.” <em class="calibre4">International
            Journal of Public Administration</em> 42 (1):28–40. doi: 10.1080/01900692.2017.1390763.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2019b. “World Bank Technical Assistance: Participation, Policy Movement, and
            Sympathetic Interlocutors.” <em class="calibre4">Policy Studies</em>:1–19. doi: 10.1080/01442872.2019.1581156.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bell, Stephen. 2011. “Do We Really Need a New ‘Constructivist Institutionalism’ to Explain Institutional
            Change?” <em class="calibre4">British Journal of Political Science</em> 41 (4):883–906. doi: 10.1017/S0007123411000147.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bond, Patrick. 2016. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> Banking and the Debate over Sub-imperialism.” <em class="calibre4">Third World
            Quarterly</em> 37 (4):611–29.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Bracking, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Money and Power: Great Predators in the Political Economy of Development</em>.
            London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Copeland, Dale C. 2006. “The Constructivist Challenge to Structural Realism.” In <em class="calibre4">Constructivism and
            International Relations: Alexander Wendt and His Critics</em>, edited by Stefano Guzzini, Anna Leander and
            Barry Buzan, 1–2. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cox, Robert W. 1983. “Gramsci, Hegemony and International Relations: An Essay in Method.” <em class="calibre4">Millennium:
            Journal of International Studies</em> 12 (2):162–75.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cox, Robert W. 1986. “Social Forces, States and World Orders: Beyond International Relations Theory.” In
            <em class="calibre4">Neorealism and Its Critics</em>, edited by Robert Keohane, 204–54. New York: Columbia University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cox, Robert W. 1992. “Multilateralism and World Order.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International Studies</em> 18
            (2):161–80.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Cox, Robert W. 1996. “Gramsci, Hegemony, and International Relations: An Essay in Method.” In
            <em class="calibre4">Approaches to World Order</em>, edited by Robert W. Cox and J. Sinclair, 124–143. Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Culpeper, Roy. 1997. <em class="calibre4">Titans or Behemoths?</em> London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            DiMaggio, Paul. 1998. “The New Institutionalisms: Avenues of Collaboration.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Institutional
            and Theoretical Economics (JITE) / Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft</em> 154 (4):696–705.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            DiMaggio, Paul, and Walter Powell. 1983. “The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective
            Rationality in Organizational Fields.” <em class="calibre4">American Sociological Review</em> 48 (2):147–60. doi:
            10.2307/2095101.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan. 2010. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in Vietnam and Indonesia:
            Inheritance of Loss</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Fine, Ben. 2001. <em class="calibre4">Social Capital versus Social Theory: Political Economy and Social Science at the Turn
            of the Millennium</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Finnemore, Martha, and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. “International Norm Dynamics and Political Change.”
            <em class="calibre4">International Organization</em> 52 (4):887–917.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Finnemore, Martha, and Kathryn Sikkink. 2001. “TAKING STOCK: The Constructivist Research Program in
            International Relations and Comparative Politics.” <em class="calibre4">Annual Review of Political Science</em> 4
            (1):391–416. doi: 10.1146/annurev.polisci.4.1.391.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Frandsen, Finn, and Winni Johansen. 2013. “Public Relations and the New Institutionalism: In Search of a
            Theoretical Framework.” <em class="calibre4">Public Relations Inquiry</em> 2 (2):205–21. doi: 10.1177/2046147x13485353.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gabor, Daniela. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Understanding the Financialisation of International Development through 11
            FAQs</em>. Washington, DC: Heinrich Böll Stiftung North America.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            George, Susan, and Fabrizio Sabelli. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Faith and Credit: The World Bank’s Secular Empire</em>.
            London: Penguin Books.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gill, Stephen. 1986. “Hegemony, Consensus and Trilateralism.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International Studies</em> 12
            (3):205–22.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gill, Stephen, and David Law. 1993. “Global Hegemony and the Structural Power of Capital.” In <em class="calibre4">Gramsci,
            Historical Materialism and International Relations</em>, edited by Stephen Gill, 93–124. Cambridge:
            Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Graeber, David. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Debt: The First 5,000 Years</em>. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. <em class="calibre4">Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci</em>. Translated by
            Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Haas, Peter. 1992. “Epistemic Communities and International Policy Coordination.” <em class="calibre4">International
            Organization</em> 46 (1):1–35.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Hanlon, Robert J. 2017. “Thinking about the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank: Can a China-Led
            Development Bank Improve Sustainability in Asia?” <em class="calibre4">Asia &amp; the Pacific Policy Studies</em> 4
            (3):541–54. doi: 10.1002/app5.186.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Harvey, David. 2005. <em class="calibre4">The New Imperialism</em>. Oxford: Oxford Unviersity Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Harvey, David. 2010. <em class="calibre4">The Enigma of Capital: And the Crises of Capitalism</em>. Oxford: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris, and Katharina Michaelowa. 2013. “Shopping for Development: Multilateral Lending,
            Shareholder Composition and Borrower Preferences.” <em class="calibre4">World Development</em> 44:142–55. doi:
            10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.12.007.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Keynes, John Maynard. 1973. <em class="calibre4">The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money</em>. London:
            Macmillan for the Royal Economic Society.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Koch, Martin, and Stephan Stetter. 2013. “Sociological Perspectives on International Organisations and the
            Construction of Global Political Order: An Introduction.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of International Organizations
            Studies</em> 4 (Special Issue):5–13.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Kose, M. Ayhan, Peter Nagle, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Naotaka Sugawara. 2020. <em class="calibre4">Global Waves of Debt:
            Causes and Consequences</em>. Washington DC: World Bank.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Lawrence, Thomas B., and Sean Buchanan. 2017. “Power, Institutions, and Organisations.” In <em class="calibre4">The SAGE
            Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism</em>, edited by Royston Greenwood, Christine Oliver, Thomas B.
            Lawrence and Renate E. Meyer, 477–506. London: SAGE Publications.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Lears, T.J. Jackson. 1985. “The Concept of Cultural Hegemony: Problems and Possibilities.” <em class="calibre4">The American
            Historical Review</em> 90 (3):567–93.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Lowndes, Vivien, and Mark Roberts. 2010. <em class="calibre4">Why Institutions Matter: The New Institutionalism in Political
            Science</em>. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Malkin, Anton, and Bessma Momani. 2016. “An Effective Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank: A Bottom Up
            Approach.” <em class="calibre4">Global Policy</em> 7 (4):521–30. doi: 10.1111/1758-5899.12357.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Morton, Adam David. 2007. <em class="calibre4">Unravelling Gramsci: Hegemony and Passive Revolution in the Global Political
            Economy</em>. London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Murphy, Craig N. 2005. <em class="calibre4">Global Institutions, Marginalisation, and Development</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Murray, Warwick E., and John Overton. 2016. “Retroliberalism and the New Aid Regime of the 2010s.”
            <em class="calibre4">Progress in Development Studies</em> 16 (3):244–60. doi: 10.1177/1464993416641576.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Nielson, Daniel L., and Michael J. Tierney. 2003. “Delegation to International Organizations: Agency Theory
            and World Bank Environmental Reform.” <em class="calibre4">International Organization</em> 57 (2):241–76.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Onuf, Nicholas. 1989. <em class="calibre4">World of Our Making: Rules and Rule in Social Theory and International
            Relations</em>. Columbia: South Carolina University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2006. “Theorizing Norm Diffusion within International Organizations.” <em class="calibre4">International
            Politics</em> 43 (3):342–61. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.ip.8800149.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2014. “Institutional Isomorphism and the Asian Development Bank’s Accountability Mechanism:
            Something Old, Something New; Something Borrowed, Something Blue?” <em class="calibre4">The Pacific Review</em> 27
            (2):217–39. doi: 10.1080/09512748.2014.882394.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2018. “Constructivism.” In <em class="calibre4">International Organization and Global Governance</em>, edited
            by Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson, 146–56. Milton: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Piketty, Thomas. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Capital in the Twenty-First Century</em>. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Robinson, William. 2005. “Gramsci and Globalisation: From Nation-State to Transnational Hegemony.”
            <em class="calibre4">Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy</em> 8 (4):559–74.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Robinson, William. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Global Capitalism and the Crisis of Humanity</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Robinson, William. 2015. “The Transnational State and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: A Global Capitalism
            Perspective.” <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em> 36 (1):1–21.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Rupert, Mark. 1998. “(Re-)Engaging Gramsci: A response to Germain and Kenny.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International
            Studies</em> 24:427–34.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Scott, W. Richard. 2008. <em class="calibre4">Institutions and Organizations: Ideas and Interests.</em> Los Angeles, CA:
            Sage.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Simon, Roger. 1991. <em class="calibre4">Gramsci’s Political Thought: An Introduction</em>. London: Lawrence &amp; Wishart
            Ltd. Original edition, 1982.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Snidal, Duncan, and Henning Tamm. 2018. “Rational Choice: From Principal-Agent to Orchestration Theory.” In
            <em class="calibre4">International Organization and Global Governance</em>, edited by Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson,
            135–45. Milton: Routledge.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Soederberg, Susan. 2006. <em class="calibre4">Global Governance in Question: Empire, Class and the New Common Sense in
            Managing North-South Relations</em>. London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Stephen, Matthew. 2014. “Rising Powers, Global Capitalism, and Liberal Global Governance: A Historical
            Materialist Account of the BRICs Challenge.” <em class="calibre4">European Journal of International Relations</em> 20
            (4):912–38.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Villaseñor, Eduardo. 1941. “The Inter-American Bank: Prospects and Dangers.” <em class="calibre4">Foreign Affairs</em> 20
            (1):165–74.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wendt, Alexander. 1995. “Constructing International Politics.” <em class="calibre4">International Security</em> 20
            (1):71–81. doi: 10.2307/2539217.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wendt, Alexander. 1999. <em class="calibre4">Social Theory of International Politics</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge University
            Press.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wihtol, Robert. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Whither Multilateral Development Finance?</em> Tokyo: Asian Development Bank
            Institute.
          </div>
</li>
<li class="calibre6">
<div class="ref">
            Wills, Joe J. 2017. <em class="calibre4">Contesting World Order?: Socioeconomic Rights and Global Justice Movements</em>.
            Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<h1 class="toc"><a class="item2" href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter2">2 Debt, development, and the emergence of
    multilateral development finance</a></h1>
<blockquote class="item13">
<div class="quote">
        Some of the most intricate and momentous problems of foreign investment are connected with loans to alien
        Governments. <em class="calibre4">It has been said that the possession of a national debt is one of the first signs of
        civilisation</em>. Borrowers are always eager to lend where there is a chance of big profits, and the
        Governments of weak and backward countries [sic] often fall an easy prey to the wiles of financiers, when they
        are faced with difficulties, internal or external.
      </div>
<footer class="item14">
        (Hobson 1914, xx–xxi emphasis added).
      </footer>
</blockquote>
<div class="item">
      This chapter start with a brief <em class="calibre4">longue durée</em> examination of the emergence of money and debt. It examines
      state debt as the precursor to the creation of various kinds of state and multilateral development finance (MDF).
      It analyses the factors that led to the <a class="item2"></a>establishment of the first multilateral development
      bank (MDB) – the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (<a class="item2"></a>IBRD), commonly
      known as the <a class="item2"></a>World Bank – in 1944, following earlier proposals for an Inter-American
      development bank. Positioning MDF within a longer tradition of finance and debt demonstrates its place in the web
      of globalised finance that slowly emerged since the creation of money. Early state debt mostly financed warfare
      and empire building, while modern MDF has evolved to focus primarily on development, though war and the arms
      trade have not been absent. Financial innovation took off from the 1800s and the creation of <a class="item2"></a>MDF was part of this. As we shall see in later chapters, the MDBs now play a significant role in
      spreading financial innovation.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      Debt is not, and never has been, an innocent instrument. Regardless of whether it was utilised for warfare,
      business, or development, money-debt’s logic turns moral questions about debt and credit ‘into a matter of
      impersonal arithmetic’ (Graeber 2014, 14). Debts must be repaid regardless of the legitimacy of those that took
      them out or the purposes for which they were taken. Positioning MDBs within a broader expansion of credit
      relations is vital to the purposes of this book. The MDBs have enhanced the legitimacy of debts – because as
      banks, they need to ensure they themselves are repaid – and expanded its reach across the world in the context of
      a post-war financial system that has no orderly mechanism for nation-states to default on debt. The poor, as
      taxpayers, have borne disproportionate responsibility for debt <a class="item2"></a>repayment.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The chapter also examines the more immediate inspirations for the <a class="item2"></a>creation of the IBRD. This
      is important because, in much of the literature, the origins of MDF are either a bit of a mystery or the outcome
      of Anglo-American negotiations at the 1944 <a class="item2"></a>Bretton Woods Conference, which produced the
      Articles of Agreement of the IMF and IBRD. However, recent historical research has helped correct this and,
      piecing together the different histories, we posit five key precedents for MDBs, taking analysis well beyond
      Anglo-American negotiations into US-Latin American cooperation, broader international cooperation, and also to
      the <a class="item2"></a>role of new ideas and hegemonic change.<a class="item2"><sup class="calibre7">1</sup></a>
</div>
<div class="item1">
      The first precedent is the growth in <a class="item2"></a>international cooperation from the mid-1800s and the
      related belief in human capacity to organise. These helped set the enabling environment for change. The second
      factor, a contextual one, is the <a class="item2"></a>change in international hegemony produced by the <a class="item2"></a>First World War, the inter-war chaos, and the Second World War. Even with a transnational theoretical
      focus, it is clear that the Bretton Woods twins – the IMF and IBRD – were the product of US global hegemony,
      which was firmly in place by the end of the Second World War. <a class="item2"></a>Keynesianism and New Deal
      <a class="item2"></a>politics are the third precedent to MDBs explored in the chapter. Keynes’ academic analysis
      provided a theoretical backbone for increased economic cooperation between states, explaining why markets left on
      their own would not necessarily produce good economic or social outcomes.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      The fourth precedent to the IBRD is less well known but very important, namely, <a class="item2"></a>US economic
      cooperation with Latin America. This produced a 1940 proposal for an Inter-American development bank, well before
      the proposal for the IBRD (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010, Helleiner 2014, 2017, Scott-Smith and Rofe 2017).
      This was a grander proposal than the IBRD and the later iteration of the IADB that emerged in the 1960s. What is
      equally interesting is that this proposal emerged out of loans that were already being provided to the region
      through the <a class="item2"></a>US Export-Import (Exim) Bank. This link to Exim banks is less well-known and
      scholars working on development rarely consider the MDBs as part of a larger MDF system (Bracking 2009). The
      final factor considered in this chapter is US economic planning during the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War,
      which drove thinking about the post-war system.
    </div>
<div class="item1">
      Taken together, this chapter paints a new picture of MDF’s emergence, one that highlights the tension between
      MDF’s progressive origins in internationalist ideals of producing a fairer, more inclusive global system and its
      state-centric origins in promoting a Western world order based on markets and debt. This is significant because
      this new analysis demonstrates how many of the strengths and limitations of the IBRD were inherent in its
      development and subsequent MDBs have reproduced this dynamic.
    </div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">2.1 The <a class="item6"></a>growth of inter-state private and public debt</h2>
<div class="item">
        State debt is vital background to the emergence of the MDF system. It is a largely capitalist phenomenon,
        although the state system predates capitalism and hence understanding MDF’s origins demands a dialectical
        understanding of capitalism and the state system (Bieler and Morton 2018). As Graeber (2014) argued, money (or
        bullion) debt owed by empires and states was historically closely linked to war and violence making, whereas
        credit money systems have generally gone hand-in-hand with more peaceful human epochs. MDF emerged late in the
        most recent bullion debt era, which started around 1450. It was designed to address <a class="item2"></a><a class="item2"></a>war debt and reconstruction problems but became increasingly part of a credit
        money system promoting development not warfare. At face value, this suggests that MDBs could be part of a more
        human-friendly future. However, at least two challenges stand in this path. First, so long as debt remains
        capitalism’s <a class="item2"></a>tribute mechanism and there is no mechanism to manage default by states, a
        shift to credit debt will not reduce the violence traditionally associated with debt collection. Second,
        development itself is a complex and contested term and MDBs have generally promoted a rather emaciated vision
        of development as growth plus a minimalist vision of poverty reduction as getting people above the
        international poverty line of $1.90 a day (Cammack 2004).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Debt and credit have, in fact, been around for a lot longer than money. People in different parts of the world
        long had informal systems of credit. Money in its bullion form began to appear around 800–500 BCE in Europe,
        India, and China. Graeber (2014, 213) argued that the single key reason for the rise of money was the increase
        in warfare because ‘[b]ullion predominates, above all, in periods of generalized violence’; money can be stolen
        and used to pay soldiers and empires need taxation to fund warfare. Graeber’s first period of bullion money,
        800 BCE to 600 CE, saw extensive warfare and the concomitant creation of great empires. As Graeber argued, cash
        and barter are usually limited to contexts of low trust involving strangers or people who are not
        credit-worthy, but money provided a problematic mathematical precision to debt that was enforceable, though
        only with the help of sovereign or state violence. You might lose your home or need to sell your wife or
        children to pay your debts but that’s ‘incidental to the creditor’ (Graeber 2014, 14). The <a class="item2"></a>debt peonage that came from this system resulted in large-scale social unrest and sometimes revolt,
        so that rulers regularly instituted general debt amnesties to resolve tensions. In contrast, the Middle Ages
        saw the return to <a class="item2"></a>credit money (not a reversion to barter), the fall of empires, bans on
        slavery across most parts of Eurasia, and an increase in living standards for many ordinary people. The age of
        capitalist empires, which Graeber (2014, 214) dates from around 1450, saw a return to bullion, slavery (in
        particular the North Atlantic slave trade), and generalised violence through both inter-state violence and the
        colonial project. While the core of Graeber’s argument is important, 1450 was a marker in the emergence of the
        state system, and capitalism appeared much later, from the late 18th century.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Bullion money and conflict were central to the emergent states system. Historically, monarchs and rulers of
        various kinds borrowed predominately to fund their wars and conflicts (Kindleberger 1984). Indeed, it seems
        likely that inter-state lending started with loans to allies or nations at war, though private lending was
        mostly driven by trade (Hobson 1914). Moving into more modern times, borrowing by states was mostly wars-driven
        too. States and their predecessors borrowed through a range of mechanisms: early on it was common for monarchs
        to take mostly short-term loans directly from wealthy individuals and later from banks and, as borrowing from
        banks developed, loan terms lengthened. States also started issuing annuities and later bonds that guaranteed
        the purchasers a long-term income stream. These were initially to finance wars, but later they backed state
        infrastructure and development projects. In either case, creditors have been willing to inflict violence
        directly or economically on those who cannot pay back such debts.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2"></a>Public or sovereign debt in Europe is generally said to have begun around 1200 CE in both
        city-states and the growing large centralised monarchical states, though it began earlier in China. The large
        European states generally borrowed domestically, but they began to borrow internationally too. English King
        Edward I borrowed extensively from the Ricciardi of Lucca from 1272 to 1310 and defaulted on the debts. In the
        mid-16th century, the Fuggers from southern Germany are credited with developing ‘financial intermediation,
        borrowing from wealth-owners and lending to a king’ (Kindleberger 1984, 45). <a class="item2"></a>Money lending
        was, of course, risky and Geisst (2013, 47) expresses the common view that ‘lending to sovereigns in general
        was riskier than lending to established merchants.’ However, according to Stasavage (2016, 3), the primary
        lenders to European states were merchants who had gained wealth from long-distance trading and wanted to
        diversify their risk. This highlights the important point that lending always involves two sets of interests –
        the lenders and the borrowers – and both sets pursue interests and systems that suit their needs. There have
        always been winners and losers in the relationship, which has changed over time, often reflecting the relative
        political weight of the parties (Stasavage 2016). The MDBs were established to reduce risk thus enabling
        expanded lending to (less credit-worth) countries, but they have always promoted the political interests of
        lenders.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        The city-states began <a class="item2"></a>long-term borrowing or fund-raising through annuities and securities
        from the early 13th century, with the large monarchical states only following a few centuries later. This
        aligns with Arrighi’s (1994) argument that Italian city-states were the economic hegemons of the 13th and 14th
        centuries, with the Dutch taking over in the 16th and 17th centuries, the British in the mid-18th century, and
        the US from the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War. Great Britain was slow to issue long-term sovereign
        debt; it sold its first Treasury order, or what we would now call government bond, in the late 1660s and its
        first annuity to the public in 1692, the latter to finance a war with France (Geisst 2013, 101–3). MDBs’
        primary source of funds today is from issuing bonds. Britain expanded the system with the creation of the Bank
        of England in 1694 amid the Nine Years’ War, as a corporation of London merchants that could sell government
        tradeable securities. The Dutch had also already established a national bank in 1609 and these banks became
        lenders to the crown often to finance wars (Geisst 2013, 106–9). Expansion in the scale of European conflict
        generated scale and innovation in finance.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        After the Reformation in the 16th century, religiously based strictures against usury started to fade and the
        modern state system began to emerge. International Relations scholars tend to regard the 1648 Peace of
        Westphalia, which ended the <a class="item2"></a>Thirty Years’ War in Europe, as a key marker, though the
        transition started earlier. This was a time of exploration and commerce, and national and commercial debt was
        central to expansion (Geisst 2013, 97). <a class="item2"></a>Colonialism was largely an extractive venture,
        whether through plunder, extraction of natural resources, or cash crop production for European markets. Still,
        extraction and plantations often required investment. The <a class="item2"></a>British and Dutch East India
        Companies – established in 1600 and 1602 – played a key role in international investments. They were initially
        private companies, yet their existence was bound up with their respective states and the Dutch East India
        Company was a pioneer of foreign direct investment (<a class="item2"></a>FDI). Both public and private
        investments were central to the formation of colonies (Mikesell 1966), and plantations became a key driver of
        private investment (Hobson 1914). The colonial states’ investments in their colonies sometimes lasted past
        their colonial role. For example, the British crown had investments in the US after independence (Geisst 2013,
        131). These investments were a way of returning capital to the colonial powers.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2"></a>Colonial era sovereign borrowing was mostly from private banks rather than other states,
        though during wars allies lent to each other. Britain utilised debt across the 18th century to build canals,
        towns, factories, and to fund industrial agriculture facilitated by the enclosure of the commons (Hobson 1914).
        The British made <a class="item2"></a>government loans to its ally Austria during the Napoleonic Wars and the
        French raised funds through borrowing and annuities to support the US in the American War of Independence
        (Kindleberger 1984), while both the British and US sought loans in Holland (Hobson 1914). The French state sold
        assets to fund Napoleon’s wars and such wartime borrowing often produced very complex transactions. Common
        causes of <a class="item2"></a>state-to-state debt were indemnities and war reparations (see Kindleberger 1984,
        ch 13) and the repayments frequently produced problems similar to those in the first era of bullion debt,
        namely, direct financial hardship leading to poverty and instability. The state system and emergent capitalism
        had granted autonomy to money and built up a political and military system to ensure repayment regardless of
        the cost to people (Graeber 2014).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        By the 19th century, complex financialisation of loans was compounding problems created by bullion <a class="item2"></a>war debt. The century saw two large waves of sovereign defaults that influenced later thinking.
        Both hit Latin America and also several other states and were preceded by speculative waves and economic
        crises. Indeed, as Toussaint (2019) argued, before each of the <a class="item2"></a>debt crises from the 19th
        to the 21st centuries, there was a boom in central states resulting in surplus capital being recycled into
        peripheral states. And the subsequent crises in peripheral states have, for the most part, been caused by
        external factors like a financial crash or a recession in the core states. This contrasts to the mainstream
        narrative that blames over-indebtedness in the periphery for the crisis. In the case of the 1820s crisis
        starting in Latin America, Toussaint (2019) pointed to the <a class="item2"></a>London Stock Exchange crash as
        the precipitator but the terms of the speculative loans made to states as the underlying driver. Perhaps the
        most problematic case was a bond issue by Mexico in 1824. Bonds to the value of £3.2 million were issued by
        Mexico’s broker B.A. Goldschmidt &amp; Co at 5% interest. But investors rarely pay the full or par price for
        bonds and, in this case, they paid just £58 for a £100 bond. This changes the effective interest rate from 5%
        to 8.6%. In addition, B.A. Goldschmidt &amp; Co took a further £750,000 in commission and fees, so Mexico ended
        up with £1.1 million from £3.2 million in debt issued (Toussaint 2019, Wynne 1951). The resulting defaults in
        1825 included all independent Latin American countries, four US states, Greece, and later Portugal. The loan
        mania leading to defaults in the early 1870s again in Latin America was even more extreme and its effects
        longer lasting. One of its more notorious impacts was the 1902–3 naval blockade of Venezuela by the UK,
        Germany, and Italy. This resulted in the Second Hague Conference of 1907 creating a convention to limit the use
        of force in debt recovery where debt is owed by one government to another (Hobson 1914).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
<a class="item2"></a>Financialisation continued after the <a class="item2"></a>First World War, feeding into
        the <a class="item2"></a>Great Depression from 1929 and another debt crisis, discussed later. The idea for the
        IBRD came from concerns about the ugly loans made during this mania as well as the problem of war debts
        creating instability. Yet, by the late 2010s, MDBs were focussed on leveraging billions of dollars of lending
        into trillions, despite the evidence that such debts will become a weight around the neck of borrowing
        countries as soon as the next crisis hits. Writing in 2020, an economic crisis seems to have been triggered by
        a virus rather than a banking crisis, but the underlying causes are financial innovation and debt build-up and
        the consequences will almost certainly be long-lasting and severe. It will involve repayments to MDBs being
        made from recycled bilateral grant aid or from each other’s loans as has occurred in the past (Bracking 2009).
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        Banks started to develop various mechanisms for settling accounts between them and lending to each other during
        crises, which provided the logic for the creation of an international settlement bank that was one of the
        building blocks in the emergence of MDF. Similarly, states and national banks, after their creation, lent to
        each other during financial crises. This led governments to discuss creating a lender of last resort, like the
        IMF, for a couple of decades before its actual establishment, discussed below.
      </div>
<div class="item1">
        After this brief detour into the long-term growth of states, money, and debt, the chapter takes a more in-depth
        look at the factors that led up to the establishment of the first MDB. We pick up the story in the 1800s, when
        Britain was still at the centre of global finance, before the US took over this mantle between the two world
        wars. The picture of boom and bust financial markets was well established. By the 1880s, international capital
        flows were on a large scale and there were significant flows to foreign governments at the national, state, and
        municipal level mostly through securities. But, from this time until the eve of the First World War, the level
        of finance flowing to governments declined significantly, though flows to private ventures continued (Mikesell
        1966, 4). Lending was tending to occur in bursts of about 20 years, followed by busts and defaults (Eichengreen
        1991). Some of these loans, especially those to Latin and Central America, produced not just defaults but also
        concerns about exploitative lending practices and conditions. The forerunners of MDF were wider than just the
        boom and bust debt cycle though and include thinking about the possibilities for international cooperation.
      </div>
</div>
<div class="calibre1">
<h2 class="item5">2.2 Five key factors behind the emergence of MDBs</h2>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">2.2.1 The <a class="item6"></a>growth of international cooperation</h3>
<div class="item">
          Nascent international cooperation was a key factor in the emergence of the MDBs. One of the first attempts at
          a mechanism for promoting international peace and stability was the Concert of Europe, established in 1815.
          It failed but set the precedent for cooperation and international organisations dedicated to pragmatic
          economic and technical cooperation did ultimately prove successful. Interestingly,
        </div>
<blockquote class="item13">
<div class="quote">
            in earlier international organizations, voting power was determined purely by financial contributions,
            ensuring that the most economically powerful members would prevail. This was the case in the International
            Telegraphic Union established in 1865 and, subsequently, in the Universal Postal Union, the International
            Wine Office, and the International Institute of Agriculture, all of which were created by 1914.
          </div>
<footer class="item14">
            (Woods 1999, 42)
          </footer>
</blockquote>
<div class="item">
          The voting proposed for, and adopted by, the IMF and World Bank and most subsequent MDBs seems to derive from
          this precedent. The distribution of power in the IBRD initially reflected the economic hierarchy at the end
          of the Second World War and this legacy has been hard to overcome with the US determined to maintain its
          control. As Pieterse (2011, 26) said, ‘even if hegemonic capacity isn’t what it used to be, the habits of
          hegemony and of following hegemony linger.’
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Still, the key point, as Mazower (2012) argued, is that between the late 1700s and the 1830s Europeans
          started to conceive not just of inter-state politics but also of an international political system
          acknowledging diverse peoples and forms of government. Systems of international organisation took a leap
          forward after the <a class="item2"></a>First World War, though most proposals and organisations were not able
          to overcome state rivalries and the forces of isolationism – especially in the US, the emerging hegemon.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">2.2.2 The First World War, <a class="item6"></a>inter-war chaos, and <a class="item6"></a>changing international hegemony</h3>
<div class="item">
          The First World War was a nodal point in the decline of British hegemony and the rise of the US. War debts
          were one significant factor in this shift. The inter-war period (1918–39) saw a range of proposals for
          international cooperation, including in the financial terrain, though few successes. Still these provided the
          inspiration for later efforts. The ideas, and failures, of earlier cooperation attempts and the <a class="item2"></a>Great Depression were key motivators driving renewed cooperation efforts during and after the
          <a class="item2"></a>Second World War.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          During the First World War, there were large government-to-government war and relief loans in particular from
          the US, Britain, and France to their allies and, subsequently, to support reconstruction (Mikesell 1966).
          However, there was no formal cooperation to assist countries recover from the war individually or
          collectively. Interestingly, Imperial China’s leader Sun Yat-sen unsuccessfully proposed ‘to the Paris Peace
          Conference of 1919 the creation of an “International Development Organization” that could mobilize
          international long-term lending to support China’s development’ (Helleiner 2017, 29). After the war, many
          countries faced political and economic chaos and for some this was exacerbated by the terms of the <a class="item2"></a>Treaty of Versailles, which concluded the war. The Great Powers established the League of
          Nations, though it was largely a failure. They attempted to organise financial cooperation through the
          League, starting with a conference in Brussels in 1920. Discussions on the monetary system and exchange rates
          at the conference were not successful but those for lending did continue. The proposals at these conferences
          provide a lineage for the Bretton Woods twins.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          One proposal for the Brussels conference sent to delegates by Léon Delacroix, Prime Minister and Finance
          Minister of Belgium, was to set up an International Bank of Issue, which has a range of similarities to the
          IBRD (Oliver 1975). Its purpose was to issue interest-bearing gold bonds in exchange for securities like
          rights over customs duties, minerals, harvests, and so on. The bonds were to be issued to importers to pay
          for countries’ imports of productive goods. Shares in the Bank were to be purchased in gold and voting power
          determined by the number of shares held, as in the IBRD. But the proposal lacked a guarantee that the bonds
          would be redeemed and sufficient incentive for nations that would not borrow to join (Oliver 1975).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          M.C.E ter Meulen, the Dutch delegate, working off Delacroix’s ideas, developed a plan for a Central
          Commission, which would allow individual states to issue interest-bearing bonds. It proposed using government
          revenues as securities and to give those securities to importers to use as collateral with exporters. The
          Central Commission was to be appointed by the <a class="item2"></a>League of Nations, which suggested that
          creditors’ interests would be protected, and the bonds were to be 5–10 years, longer than Delacroix’s, aiming
          to give borrowers more chance of recovering. The ter Meulen Plan was accepted and a Commission was
          established but, in 1922, the scheme was abandoned without making any loans. One of the reasons for this was
          the development of alternative sources of finance, in particular the 1919 <a class="item2"></a>US Edge Act
          provided long-term credits to support exports and, in the same year, the UK established an <a class="item2"></a>Exports-Credit Scheme (Oliver 1975). Export-import banks are, in fact, a key predecessor to the
          MDBs and they remain as siblings in the contemporary MDF system.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          There were several other plans for <a class="item2"></a>economic cooperation in the 1920s and 1930s of lesser
          and greater ambition, the most important being John Maynard Keynes’ 1930 plan for a Supranational Bank. This
          was the predecessor to his International Clearing Union Plan that was the alternative to US Treasury
          official’s, Harry Dexter White’s, plan for the post-war economic and financial order. Keynes’ proposal was
          focussed on short-term adjustment finance, but other plans had long-term development aspects. What is notable
          is that there was significant debate on the topic in the inter-war years.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          By the mid-1920s, the post-war chaos seemed to settle, and private international finance began to flow again.
          In contrast to the 19th century when flows to emerging regions mostly financed wars, these flows financed
          many productive investments (Mikesell 1966). Equally, however, many loans were reckless and excessive and
          there were mass defaults in the 1930s, resulting in private long-term lending slowing to almost a
          stand-still; it was even slower to recover after the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War. The defaults were
          caused, or aggravated, by the <a class="item2"></a>Great Depression, which started in 1929 with a financial
          crisis in the US. It spread internationally initially because Germany relied on US loans to pay its war
          reparations to Great Britain and France, and they, in turn, relied on these funds to pay their war debts to
          the US and other countries. Global lending collapsed and countries resorted to trade protectionism and
          currency devaluations which only exacerbated the crisis by contributing to a collapse in global trade.
          Mikesell (1966, 3–4) argued that the collapse of private lending in the inter-war years was in large part
          responsible for the establishment of the ‘complex of national and international public lending agencies’ that
          grew in the post-war era as there was clear evidence that free markets were not providing the necessary
          credit. The defaults of the 1930s produced the idea that loans for reconstruction and productive investments
          should be based on the recipients’ ability to repay. In other words, creditors should set conditions that
          were conducive to repayment and growth (Mikesell 1966, 19–20). Here is a key logic for MDF – coordination of
          creditors and debtors needs. The focus on fair terms between creditors and debtors is no longer as prominent
          in many MDBs but the broader idea of the need for economic cooperation between nations has remained.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          In 1931, US President Herbert Hoover put in place a one-year moratorium on <a class="item2"></a>war debt
          repayments from all nations and this became permanent (Mikesell 1966, Rohrer 2006). The chaos of the
          inter-war years and unregulated debt informed the US approach in the Second World War – from March 1941,
          under the Lend-Lease programme, the US supplied whatever goods were declared by President Roosevelt as ‘in
          the interest of national defense’ to more than 38 nations and repayment was as ‘the President deems
          satisfactory’ (Kimball 2003). Between $42 and $50 billion of aid was given and repayment frequently came in
          the form of post-war agreements rather than cash or bullion. Before and during Lend-Lease, many nations had
          taken on debt, and Britain only paid back the last of this debt in 2006 (Rohrer 2006).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Despite the <a class="item2"></a>failure of the League of Nations’ attempts at economic cooperation,
          <a class="item2"></a>international monetary cooperation expanded during the inter-war period (Mikesell 1966).
          Cooperation between the emerging system of Federal Reserve Banks began in the 1920s (Ahamed 2009) and the
          Bank for International Settlements (<abbr>BIS</abbr>) was established in 1930 to manage the flow of German
          reparations and to formalise cooperation between central banks. German reparations were suspended shortly
          after the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>BIS</abbr> was established but it continued to operate as a clearing
          house. It was set up as a corporation with shares owned by central banks, except for the US where private
          banks purchased the shares (Mikesell 1966, 14–15). This is like the IMF and IBRD, which are structured as
          state-owned shareholder-based institutions. The <a class="item2"></a>US Exchange Stabilization Fund was
          established in 1934 to promote exchange rate cooperation, which means it is a direct predecessor of the IMF.
          However, before the Second World War, the US was not willing to underpin an international system and the UK
          no longer had the capacity to do so (Arrighi 1994, 271, Ikenberry 1992, 306), thus cooperation was still
          largely piecemeal.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">2.2.3 Keynesianism and the <a class="item6"></a><a class="item6"></a>New Deal</h3>
<div class="item">
          Along with the shift in hegemonic power from the UK to the US, a vital part of the emergence of MDF was the
          arrival of a new theoretical and ideological framework, a new ‘common sense’ around economics (Engel 2010).
          The Great Depression, the rise of communism, and the increasing organisation of labour saw academics and
          politicians alike agreeing that high rates of unemployment were not just sub-optimal, but also dangerous in
          that they could lead to chaos or revolution. The Great Depression was tangible evidence that free markets do
          not always produce ideal economic and social outcomes. The new faith in human capacity to organise and the
          practical example of socialist states, which had grown industrially during the Great Depression, opened the
          door to the idea of state planning, which became a buzz-word in politics (Hobsbawm 1999).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          These experiences and ideas were given a theoretical baptism by Keynes who homed in on the importance of the
          demand-side of the economic equation and the negative impact of deflationary policies. He started this focus
          in <em class="calibre4">A Tract on Monetary Reform</em> (1923) and bought together his ideas in his magnum opus, <em class="calibre4">The
          General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money</em> (1936). He argued that there was not necessarily a
          direct relationship between savings and investment and that confidence affects investment. The level of both
          aggregate demand and investment might not be enough to create full employment and that investors were too
          interested in short-term profits not long-term societal gains. This provided a case for government investment
          to increase demand and direct investment to its most productive uses. The <a class="item2"></a>‘Keynesian
          revolution’ was in fact a two-headed animal – ‘first, the theoretical revolution in economic analysis; and,
          second, the practical revolution in governmental policies’ (Meade 1975, 82). The revolution in government
          policies did not always strictly follow Keynes’ ideas, for example, in the growth of the welfare state, but
          the governmental revolution was more important than the economic one (Meade 1975), and it greatly improved
          the life experience of most people in Western countries. Overall, ‘there was a profound change in the
          approach of liberal capitalist states to the role of government intervention in the economy – there was a new
          openness to the idea of economic planning and of state participation in the economy’ (Engel 2010, 19). These
          changes further opened the door to expanded economic cooperation at the international level too.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The Second World War deepened US economic dominance as its economic productivity expanded and control over
          the financial system shifted to New York (Arrighi 1994, Kennedy 1989). <a class="item2"></a>US political
          isolationism was put to rest for many decades and the US became the global hegemon able to lead international
          organisation building. Indeed, the US government began planning for the post-war economic and political order
          from the autumn of 1939 (Gardner 1980), prior to becoming directly involved in the war! Its first focus was
          the post-war monetary and economic system, not the organisation of peace and security (Ikenberry 1992). US
          economic planning is discussed a little more below but first we turn to its economic cooperation with
          <a class="item2"></a>Latin America.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">2.2.4 <a class="item6"></a>US economic cooperation with Latin America: from export-import
        banks to development banks</h3>
<div class="item">
          Discussion of regional economic and financial cooperation started in earnest with the First Pan-American
          Conference of <a class="item2"></a>1889–90, in other words prior to the European discussions of the inter-war
          years. This conference proposed the idea of a private International American Bank to facilitate trade and
          investment in the region (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010). The then US President supported the idea, but it
          did not pass the Congress. Still it was reaffirmed at the Second Pan-American Conference in <a class="item2"></a>1898, before disappearing. The 1913 <a class="item2"></a>Federal Reserve Act, in addition to
          setting up a decentralised reserve system, dealt with many of the issues that had concerned the first
          conference by allowing US banks to finance overseas trade, to operate accounts in other countries, and to
          establish agencies and branches abroad (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010). The issue of improving trade and
          investment relations, specifically exchange rates and adequate credit flows to Latin America, was again
          discussed during the <a class="item2"></a>First World War but little came of it. In the 1920s another credit
          binge took hold.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          By the 1930s, the US was concerned about countering the appeal of <a class="item2"></a>Nazism and statist and
          nationalist economic policies in Latin America, which had grown during the Great Depression. The Depression
          had hit Latin America hard with the prices of its main primary commodities exports dropping from 1928. In
          fact, the ‘Pan-American Agricultural Conference of 1930 contemplated the creation of an Inter-American
          Agricultural Bank’ extending rural credits and finance for trade, but dropped the idea fearing subjugation to
          Wall Street (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010, 26).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Franklin D. Roosevelt’s election in 1932 changed relations with Latin America with the ‘Good Neighbor’ policy
          renouncing US military intervention in the region. The policy was expanded over time to include a financial
          partnership promoting development (Helleiner 2014). The Seventh Inter-American Conference in <a class="item2"></a>1933 proposed greater economic and financial cooperation through an agency comprising a Board,
          Consultative Committee, and an Inter-American Bank, which was to be like a central bank for the continent.
          Yet again, the US did not pursue implementation due to Congressional opposition. The US did though formally
          established an <a class="item2"></a>Export-Import (Exim) Bank in 1934 and, towards the end of the 1930s, it
          started providing the equivalent of development loans to some Latin American countries (Mikesell 1966, 13).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The language in Executive Order 6581 that established the Exim Bank has clear parallels to the IBRD’s
          Articles of Agreement (<abbr>AoA</abbr>). It states that, in creating the Exim Bank, Congress aimed:
        </div>
<blockquote class="item13">
<div class="quote">
            to remove obstacles to the free flow of interstate and foreign commerce which tend to diminish the amount
            thereof, to provide for the general welfare, by promoting the fullest possible utilization of the present
            productive capacities of industries, to reduce and relieve unemployment, to improve standards of labor, and
            otherwise to rehabilitate industry…
          </div>
<footer class="item14">
            (Roosevelt 1934)
          </footer>
</blockquote>
<div class="item">
          The IBRD’s <a class="item2"></a><abbr>AoA</abbr> (World Bank 2012) promote ‘private foreign investment,’ the
          ‘development of productive facilities,’ and the ‘development of the productive resources of members, thereby
          assisting in raising productivity, the standard of living and conditions of labor in their territories.’ New
          Deal, Keynesian principles permeate both documents. Like the IBRD, the Exim Bank was set up with capital
          stock divided into shares, though all were held by the Secretary of State and Commerce. Further, the IBRD
          followed the US Exim Bank’s procedure of providing funds on receipt of invoices rather than establishing a
          deposit in the name of the borrower and of investigating the usefulness of projects, although as an MDB it
          abandoned the Exim’s tied aid (Oliver 1975, 90).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          A memorandum to the President in October 1938 by White under guidance from Treasury Secretary Henry
          Morgenthau urged large-scale economic aid to Latin America and China to secure peace and make the Good
          Neighbor policy effective (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010). White was the US Treasury Department official
          who drafted the first plans for what became the IMF and World Bank, and he had <a class="item2"></a>New Deal
          views and supported statist development models in line with US Treasury views.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          A 1939 consultation meeting with Latin America’s foreign ministers ‘asked again for the creation of a new
          financial institution’ with a multilateral focus and not a bilateral one like the US Exim Bank (Diaz-Bonilla
          and del Campo 2010, 32). The Mexican delegation presented a draft for the institution which included a range
          of clearing house and exchange stabilisation functions, many of which had been discussed earlier. However,
          ‘on this occasion the Mexican Delegation expressly added the following: (f) To act as a channel for the
          investment of capital which will promote sound economic development in the American Republics’ (Villaseñor
          1941, 166). Indeed Kirsty Thornton (2017) attributed this addition to Eduardo Villaseñor, then Mexico’s
          Undersecretary of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, and noted that Mexican officials had been
          discussing long-term development finance for at least 15 years prior to Bretton Woods. The US tried to
          deflect this request through expansion of the Exim Bank in 1940 and an agreement that it could lend to
          governments not just the private sector. Still, US views about a regional state-backed investment mechanism
          started to change; they became more open to the idea. In this context, the Inter-American Financial and
          Economic Advisory Committee began work on a draft charter for an Inter-American Bank (IAB), which is the
          chief direct progenitor of the MDBs.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The plan combined a clearing house, a stabilisation fund (like the IMF), and a development bank promoting the
          growth of industry and infrastructure. It was also to promote research, provide technical advice, and promote
          and publish data (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010). Like the IBRD, its first purpose was promoting the
          productive use of capital (Federal Reserve Bulletin 1940). Its structure was a bank with a capital base of
          $100 million, made up of 1,000 shares of $100,000. This follows the inter-war plans for an institution by
          Delacroix and became the model for the Bretton Woods twins. Voting was linked to shareholding and important
          decisions required a four-fifths majority, though the US was not going to have veto power as it did with the
          IMF and IBRD. Administration was to be vested in a Board of Directors meeting at least four times a year,
          rather than a permanent presence as the IMF and IBRD have. The proposal flagged the idea of an executive
          committee to make decisions between Board meetings, like the IBRD’s Executive Directors who are responsible
          for day-to-day decision-making. The draft charter also outlined that any medium- or long-term loans needed a
          report from experts before approval.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          From the US side, drafting was led by the State Department and White worked on it along with Emilio G.
          Collado who also worked on the IBRD. Oliver (1971, 4) argued the White’s stabilisation fund and bank plan
          were ‘an outgrowth of the Inter-American Bank proposal, though it embodied his own thoughts and the thoughts
          which had been expressed during earlier discussions within the Treasury Department.’ Reading the proposed
          charter for the IAB that seems clear, although, in terms of the IMF, the US Exchange Stabilization Fund and
          other developments influenced White’s thinking too (see Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010, Helleiner 2017). In
          a footnote, Oliver (1971, 24) argues that Collado, Assistant State Department Chief, Division of American
          Republics was a major author of the Convention for the Establishment of an Inter-American Bank and ‘may
          really have been the individual most responsible for the conception’ of the IBRD. He was later the IBRD’s
          first US Executive Director. In an oral history, Collado (1974) stated:
        </div>
<blockquote class="item13">
<div class="quote">
            In that committee we had a proposal for an inter-American bank. We actually wrote a treaty for an
            inter-American bank which was signed by half the American Republics, including the United States, but it
            was never ratified. It’s a long story as to why it was never ratified. Harry White was one of the principal
            authors of this with Adolf Berle, who was the Assistant Secretary of State at the time. I got to do a great
            deal of the work and this was usually the rule. Actually a great deal of thought was put into an <a class="item2"></a>inter-American bank proposal at that time and it had some rather innovative aspects which never
            survived into the World Bank. It had access to the credit of the Federal Reserve System in a way that was
            never further put into some of the later proposals and maybe that’s why it never got adopted.
          </div>
</blockquote>
<div class="item">
          The focus on White, Collado, and Berle, it seems to us, obscures the leading role of the Latin American
          delegations, in particular Mexico; indeed, <em class="calibre4">The Washington Times</em> critically labelled the IAB
          <a class="item2"></a>‘a Mexican-inspired institution’ (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010, 39). The proposed
          operational powers of the IAB exceeded those of the IMF and World Bank and the ‘sheer ambition of the bank
          project proved intimidating’ (Diaz-Bonilla and del Campo 2010, 39). The US never ratified the charter after
          stiff opposition from sections of Congress and private banks. The latter is not surprising given the IAB had
          a broad mandate including making loans to private individuals and business. Indeed, Villaseñor (1941) argued
          that this should be its primary function.
        </div>
</section>
<section>
<h3 class="item7">2.2.5 <a class="item6"></a>US economic planning and the <a class="item6"></a>Bretton Woods
        Conference</h3>
<div class="item">
          Economic planning by the US and its allies has been outlined and debated in depth (see inter alia Block 1977,
          Gardner 1980, Helleiner 2014, Van Dormael 1978) and <a class="item2">Chapter 3</a> explores the outcomes of
          that planning. This section simply outlines some of the key topics of debate and what was not agreed upon and
          not debated. The US State Department began economic and political planning in 1939, prior to becoming
          directly involved in the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War (Gardner 1980). The State Department had a
          <em class="calibre4">laissez-faire</em> approach and adopted, at times, aggressive tactics to push its trade agenda. The
          Treasury had been more influenced by the chaos of the inter-war years and was committed to planning. They
          became the key US negotiators and found common ground with the British and others on the need for a post-war
          monetary system (Ikenberry 1992). Still, the Bretton Woods institutions were shaped by the trade-offs needed
          to get approval from Congress, which was dominated by <em class="calibre4">laissez-faire</em> views (Gardner 1980, Scammell
          1983). The planning negotiations aimed to create a stable trading order with reduced tariffs and limited
          non-tariff barriers to trade, cooperation in exchange rates and settlements to avoid the competitive
          devaluations of the inter-war years, building on the nascent central bank cooperation of that period, and to
          promote economic expansion after the war.
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Negotiations between the US and its allies were based on the <em class="calibre4">Suggested Plan for a United and Associated
          National Stabilization Fund and a Bank for Reconstruction and Development of the United and Associated
          Nations</em>, drafted by White first in 1941. The plan was circulated for comment in mid-1943 and did not
          include a plan for the Bank. When the Bank plan was published it was no longer a central international bank
          as the IAB proposal was for the Americas, it had become an international lending agency (Block 1977). The
          British, led by Keynes, produced their own proposal for the <a class="item2"></a>Stabilization Fund – the
          International Clearing Union. <a class="item2"></a>Negotiations before and at Bretton Woods, though, were
          based on the White plan. There were 44 nations present, including strong representation from Latin America
          and the USSR. Still, it is often presented as an Anglo-American affair. There is some truth in this, but
          recent historical research has reclaimed the role played by other states, in particular in the developmental
          focus of the World Bank (Scott-Smith and Rofe 2017).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          The IMF that emerged out of Bretton Woods was designed to manage a fixed <a class="item2"></a>exchange rate
          system with gold and US dollars the core units of account, act as a multilateral clearing house of funds
          between nations, supplement international liquidity for states, and impose conditions on states in regular
          deficit if they wished to access further liquidity from the Fund. Keynes had wanted both countries in surplus
          and deficit to be pressured to adjust but this did not suit US interests at the time; US interests did not
          consider that they would ever face regular deficit, as is the case now. Conditionality was also built into
          the IBRD’s <abbr>AoA</abbr>, and, as sibling organisations, the World Bank has often acted as an enforcer of
          IMF conditionality, especially from the 1980s with the emergence of the Washington Consensus (more on this in
          <a class="item2">Chapters 4</a> and <a class="item2">5</a>).
        </div>
<div class="item1">
          Trade negotiations did not get far at Bretton Woods, dominated as it was by representatives from ministries
          of finance, though for the US orderly exchange mechanisms and convertibility were core to trade. The IMF
          dealt with short-term balance of payments deficits, while the World Bank was to provide long-term loans for
          reconstruction and development. This sounds comprehensive but there were key topics for the financial order
          not addressed. First, the movement of private capital – the system encouraged immediate liberalisation of
          countries’ capital account. In fact, most of the world did not achieve this for some decades and attempts at
          premature liberalisation were the cause of a number of crises for developed countries (Scammell 1983).
          Capital movement’s capacity to cause instability for developing and emerging economies dramatically expanded
          after the liberalisation of finance markets from 1973 with the end of fixed exchange rates. In the 1980s,
          many developing countries were pushed to open their capital accounts through IMF and World Bank
          conditionality often resulting in financial crises. The scale of international financial movements and
          lending is a significant cause of instability for developing countries and something that MDBs promote
          (Bracking 2009). Second, there are many weaknesses in the regime for supervising and regulating banking and
          finance, domestically and internationally, as was all too clear in the 2007–8 GFC. These weaknesses are a
          problem for the Global South, where debt can easily build up for a host of reasons. Virtually no matter how a
          state came to power, they can put a country into debt and this debt must be repaid by citizens. Third, there
          was no mechanism to deal with long-term default by states established at Bretton Woods. White’s first draft
          of the IMF and IBRD did include a role in <a class="item2"></a>debt restructuring but this disappeared in
          later drafts (Helleiner 2017), presumably because it was too politically contentious for the world’s largest
          creditor, the US, where powerful Wall Street interests wanted to ensure debtor paid up. The IMF and World
          Bank have taken up some of this role, though they have no legal power in managing relations with private
          creditors. Further, because of the tendency to bail-out failed governments and banks, the finance system has
          created an enormous moral hazard that favours the interests of elites (Bracking 2009). The MDBs face
          virtually no risk of non-repayment.
        </div>
</section>
</div>

<br/></div>