---

Author: Robert W. Cox.
Title: Ideologies and the New International Economic Order: Reflections on Some Recent 

Source: International Organization, Vol. 33, No. 2 (Spring, 1979), pp. 257-302
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2706612 . 
Accessed: 12/06/2014 16:47

---

# Ideologies and the New International Economic Order:reflections on some recent literature #

## What is the NIEO literature about? ###

The demand for a New International Economic Order, that can be formally dated from the Algiers conferenceof the Non-Alignedcountries in 1973 and which has been pursued with the backing of these countries in the United Nations and other international instances, <mark>has precipitated a reconsideration of the structureand processes of world political economy among all the principal interests.</mark> This has resulted in a large and growing literature that to date, if it has not entirely clarified the problems and issues besetting the world political economy, has at least made it possible to identify certain salient currents of thought about them, each setting forth a mode of analysis and a strategy of action. This review article attempts to survey some of this literature. I take my stand not in some conception of objective science from which to allocate merits and demerits to particular authors, but rather as an observer of the confrontations of ideas, considering the role of ideas in relation to the positions of conflicting forces. The survey cannot claim to be comprehensive, though it does aim to be representative of different perspectives. A list of the books and documents covered is appended at theend, and references will be made by principal author and page number in the body of the text.

Ideological analysis is, of course, a critic's weapon and one most effectively used against the prevailing orthodoxies which, when stripped of their putative universality, become seen as special pleading for historically transient but presently entrenched interests. Social science is never neutral. It is, therefore, only fair to warn the reader that my purpose in undertaking this survey was to discover and encourage avenues of enquiry that might in the long run aid towards the transformation of power relations both within and among nations in the direction of greater socialequity. Thus, I found the work of some of the radical neo-mercantilists and historical materialists discussed below more potentially valuable (though as yet very inadequately developed) than the more prestigious products of the western academic establishments.[1]

Some preliminary remarks are called for before getting to the books themselves. In the first place, what is the New International Economic Order? Or, more specifically, what, in the broad, is this literature about? A number of answers are possible, all of which are in some measure correct. At a first level, the NIEO is a series of specific demands and considerations embodied in an impressive range and number of official documents adopted by international conferences. The extent of these can bemeasured by the size of a two-volume collection of official papers compiled by the librarians of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research which includes texts from the Groupof 77 and its regional groups and the Non-Aligned Countriesas well as from the organizations of the United Nations family (UNITAR, [*A New International Economic Order. Selected Documents*](https://archive.org/details/newinternational0000unse_h4s7/page/482/mode/2up), 1945-1975). 

At a second level, the NIEO is a <mark>negotiation process, broadly speaking, between countries of North and South but taking place through a variety of institutions and forums in which are represented wider or narrower ranges of functional and geographical interests.</mark> This negotiation process is concerned with the possibilities of agreement concerning both revised international policies and reformed or new institutions(including the power relationships governing these institutions). No one has yet attempted to plot the inter-institutional complex through which this negotiation process is taking place, though UNITAR and the Ford Foundation have sponsored a team project with Robert W. Greggas principal investigator to "describe, explain, and analyze" this aspect.


At a third level, the NIEO has precipitated a debate about the real and desirable basic structure of world economic relations. Though the term "international" (consciously chosen in preference to "world" or "global" by the authors of the demand) connotes a limitation of the issue to relations among countries, the debate cannot be so artificially constrained and has ranged inevitably into domestic and transnational structural issues. Structures here encompass the relationships among regions within countries, among different industries and economic activities, among different modes of production, and among social classes, as well as those among countries of different groupings. This debate brings into focus theories concerned with imperialism,  with the causes of underdevelopment, and with the physical limits to growth.

Finally, at a fourth level, the debate becomes one about the form of knowledge appropriate to understanding these issues. In effect, the demand for a NIEO has mobilized a fresh challenge to the intellectual hegemony of liberal economics and its claims to an exclusive "rationality." For its critics, economics is an ideology derived from a particular historically determined set of power relations, not a science with absolute and universal scope, <mark>and the emergence of new power relations of which the NIEO is one manifestation calls for a reformulating of a more appropriate political economy.</mark>

The specific policy and institutional issues that are the subject of diplomatic negotiations and the theoretical and epistemological issues debated in academic seminars and symposia are indeed intimately related. Any general organization of power not only generates institutions and policy mechanisms but also sustains ideas which legitimate it. Such a dominant ideology justifies the existing order of power relations by indicating the benefits accruing (or accruable) to all the principal parties, including in particular the subordinate or less favored. So long as these latter acquiesce in the dominant mode of thought, their demands are likely to be reconcilable within the existing system of power. However, where there is a general challenge to the prevailing structure of power, then the articulation of counter-ideologies becomes a part of the action, and the possibility of reaching reasonably durable agreement on the practical issues of policies and institutions becomes bound up with the possibility of reaching a new consensus on theories and modes of analysis.

Moreover, in the case of the NIEO, there is a considerable overlap in the personnel concerned, on the one hand with the policy negotiations, and on the other hand with the debate about theory. This underlines the practical political importance of the theoretical issues and indeed gives the debate about theory a certain logical priority in that its outcomes would provide the rationale for future policies. Much of the literature to be discussed is the product of actual participants in the negotiations and is thus to be considered as political action, an aspect of a political process (rather than as independent, objective, or scientific analyses made by disinterested observers).

The intellectual participants who are politically active in the NIEO negotiations together with those academics who play a more indirect role can be seen as linked in a series of networks, each of which is mobilizing ideas around a certain partial consensus. There are, of course, disagreements among individuals within a particular network, but these disagreements are within a certain commonality of ideas or a basic common approach. There are also certain individuals who participate in more than one network and who are thus potential hinges or go-betweens. <mark>Such individuals might conceivably be important in exploring the possibility of broadening a partial consensus to encompass two or more networks, ultimately towards a new hegemonic ideology.</mark> The present state of the literature does not enable one to speculate about the shape of a new hegemony, but it does make it possible to juxtapose the main networks and to place the various authors within this juxtaposition of perspectives or partial consensuses (while recognizing that individual authors may resist assimilation to a school). The political nature of the literature justifies this political mode of analysis.

These networks are not mere constructs of my imagination, classifications of authors whose ideas seem to have a certain community of spirit. Intellectual production is now organized like the production of goods or of other services.
The material basis of networks is provided by formal (usually nongovernmental) organizations as mobilizing and coordinating agencies with research directors and funds (from sources sometimes more, sometimes less visible) for commissioning studies, financing conferences, and symposia or informal luncheon discussions. The materially independent scholar is a rarity, though perhaps not quite extinct. The material basis of networks allows for a selection of participants which guarantees a certain homogeneity around a basic core of orthodoxy. However, since the object of the exercise is consensus-building, narrow orthodoxy or exclusiveness would be a self-defeating criterion, and the activators of each network extend their search to those whose ideas reach the outer boundaries of what might ultimately be acceptable. Above and beyond material support, the organized network holds out to the intellectual the prospect of political influence, of being listened to by top decision-makers and even of becoming part of the decision-making team.

Five opinion clusters, some of which are more or less structured networks and some less formally structured orientations or approaches to the issues of North-South relations, can be identified from the literature concerning the NIEO:

1. An "establishment" perspective that could be characterized as <mark>monopolistic liberalism</mark> is the dominant view in the industrialized countries. The Trilateral Commission is the most important formal organization coordinating this network. There is no need to embroider upon the variety of articles, journalistic and otherwise, that have underlined the potentially influential nature of this assemblage of political, business, and academic personalities from North America, Western Europe, and Japan including a number of leading members of governments presently in power. The NIEO lies at the center of the Trilateral Commission's concerns and is the subiect of several studies commissioned by it. One in particular, *Towards a Renovated International System* by Richard N. Cooper, Karl Kaiser, and Masataka Kosaka is extremely pertinent. Pierre Uri has written a book called *Development With out Dependence* for the Atlantic Institute for International Affairs that concords broadly with Trilateral views. Several prominent Trilateralists figure in another symposium organized at M.I.T. in May 1976 with the support of the Ford Foundation which has resulted in a volume of papers edited by Jag-dish N. Bhagwati. The contributors, while mainly American, include some non-Americans (British, Canadian, Japanese, and Third World). The Council on Foreign Relations, another body whose membership overlaps with the Trilateral Commission, has sponsored within the framework of its 1980s project, a study by Albert Fishlow, Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro, Richard R. Fagen, and Roger Hansen entitled *Rich and Poor Nations in the World Economy*. A further study that can be read as having a relationship to this intellectual community, also supported in part by the Ford Foundation as well as by the U.S. National Science Foundation and the Netherlands Government, is the report prepared for the United Nations by Wassily Leontief and others, *The Future of the World Economy*. Basically these documents, whether the emphasis is on "the management of interdependence" (Trilateral, p. 5) or on "the correction of the existing economic inequalities among countries" (Leontief, p. 30), take the existing structure of world economy as a starting point and ask what adjustments can be agreed upon by the dominant powers to gain wider accept-ability. This is the view from the top.

<!-- perhaps Alex jones wasn't actually wrong -->

2. What can be described as a social democratic variant of the establishment view shares with it a basic commitment to the normative preference for a world economy with relatively free movement of capital, goods, and technology as well as an acceptance of the rationality of conventional economics, while putting more stress upon the needs of the poor. It represents, in other words, a broader and somewhat more generous view of the adjustments that can be made without fundamentally disturbing the existing hegemony. The network that is developing ideas consistent with this general perspective is less fully organized than the first one, though key groupings can be identified. The Club of Rome group presided over by Jan Tinbergen that produced the report *Reshaping the International Order* (or RIO report for short) represents a major statement of this viewpoint. Like the publications mentioned under the first category, this also is the fruit of a collective effort.
Tinbergen is a major figure articulating this tendency. The [https://www.ids.ac.uk/about/vision-strategy/](Institute of Development Studies) at the University of Sussex has been an important center nourishing and stimulating this current of thought and some people associated with it, now or formerly, have been of influence in shaping relevant programs of the United Nations and other international agencies, the world employment program of the ILO for example. Dudley Seers, Paul Streeten, and Hans Singer, all Sussex alumni, are among these. Hans Singer, who has been influential within the UN secretariat on development assistance policy as well as in an independent academic capacity, has written with Jared Ansari a book intended for undergraduates and for the general reader entitled *Rich and Poor Countries*. From the ILO's world employment program comes a study viewing the future of the world economy from the standpoint of maximizing employment, especially in less developed countries, by Bohuslav Herman, *The Optimal International Division of Labour*, a study given its ideological consecration in a preface by Jan Tinbergen. Gerald Helleiner of the University of Toronto, whose intellectual affinities are with the Sussex group, has edited another symposium, *A World Divided: The Less Developed Countries in the International Economy*. Whereas the Bhagwati book is addressed primarily to rich country policy makers in answer to the question, What response can be given to Third World demands?, the Helleiner book is addressed primarily to Third World policy makers in answer to the question, What Third World strategies towards the First World are most likely to advance Third World development goals? The contributors to the Helleiner symposium are mainly economists from the First World (mostly non-American) who are actively sympathetic with Third World aims (Reginald Green, for instance, has worked directly in the service of the Tanzanian government) together with several Third World economists. By and large, the social democratic perspective is that of First World understanding and sympathy with the Third World. Helleiner and Streeten are both contributors to the Bhagwati volume and though more at home in the second may be regarded as examples of potential links between the first two networks. Some contributors to the Helleiner symposium should also be assimilated into the following perspectives.

3. There is a category of more or less official Third World representatives who have formalized a continuing network, the Third World Forum. I do not wish to suggest here that there is a single Third World viewpoint. The range of opinion among spokesmen for countries in the Third World is much wider than that to be found among participants in this network, diversified as it is.
Yet there is a body of thought-engaged-in-action that corresponds to the French adjective *tiers-mondiste*––a form of radical perspective shaped less by abstract analytical categories then by existential political struggle. Mahbub ul Haq, a senior official of the World Bank who was formerly responsible for economic planning in Pakistan at the time of General Ayoub, places the origin of this grouping at the Stockholm conference on the environment in 1972. In his book *The Poverty Curtain: Choices for the Third World*, which is a kind of personal memoir of the evolution of thinking of a Yale-trained Third World economic policy maker, <mark>he indicates how this organization grew out of informal discussions he had with Gamani Corea (of UNCTAD), Enrique Iglesias (of ECLA) and Samir Amin (of the UN Institute in Dakar for Development Planning)</mark>, all of them high level international officials and Third World intellectuals. The purpose, according to Mahbub ul Haq, was "intellectual self-reliance, both at the national and at the international level, which could give some form and substance to our [i.e., the Third World's] aimless search for appropriate development strategies at home and to our disorganized efforts to coordinate our negotiating positions abroad" (Mahbub ul Haq, p. 84). The Third World Forum took shape during 1972-73 at a time when the Third World countries' claims seemed to have been set aside by the First World in its concern with its own internal economic problems. The network was already in being when the succession of events of 1973, including the oil crisis, gave a new momentum to the Third World. President Echeverria of Mexico both gave his country a leading role in promoting the NIEO at the United Nations and put his personal support behind the Third World Forum, and the Third World Forum was not unassociated with his bid for the Secretary-General ship of the UN. If since that time the Third World Forum seems to have been less active, its function may be revived through the proposal for a more formal Third World secretariat. From outside the circle of Third World economic negotiators, but still within the orbit of senior international officials, comes another recent book Albert Tévoédjre's *La pauvreté, richesse des peuples* (an English edition is in preparation) by the director of the ILO's International Institute for Labour Studies, a national of Benin (formerly Dahomey).

Ideologically, the Third World network of policy intellectuals shares the ambivalence of official Third World positions. Some, like Mahbub ul Haq himself, have impeccable liberal economics credentials, though experience with the practical problems of Third World development has led them to abandon faith in the market in favor of government intervention. Others, like Samir Amin, have a Marxist background. One senses a constant tension between intellectual analysis that leans towards a rejection of western models (and thus implicitly of the institutions that embody these models, such as the World Bank) and a hope for support from the western economies (which would be delivered through these same institutions), and tension also between a conviction that social and political revolution is a necessary condition for real development in the Third World and an unwillingness to allow First World economists and officials to use the ineffectiveness of existing governmental measures as an excuse for placing conditions of surveillance on resource transfers to the Third World. The ambivalence is acute in personal terms as these intellectuals, whose thinking tends to take a radical bent, are aware that their political influence depends upon the support of governments that cannot share their views. They face in an acute form the dilemma of the intellectual who seeks power and influence with power as an opportunity to put his ideas into practice, while knowing in his heart that the very power he solicits will be the contradiction of his goals.

4. My fourth category can be designated neo-mercantilist. Unlike the first three it does not have a formal network, though at least one group of American policy thinkers, the group associated with the magazine *Commentary* some of whose members have also enjoyed support from the Lehrman Institute in New York, may be seen as constituting something of a network within a much larger and more amorphous cluster. Whereas most of the authors in the first three categories considered here are in one way or another active in the negotiating process over NIEO policy issues, the neo-mercantilist works we have to consider here are those of individual observer-critics, not policy intellectuals.

The neo-mercantilist sees economic policy as an instrument of political goals––politics leads and economics follows. (In de Gaulle's phrase, *l'in-tendance suivra*.) Economic theory that makes an abstraction of economic behavior from politics is therefore to be rejected (as biased and misleading) in favor of a revival of political economy. The world is to be understood, not in terms of a market equilibrium model, but in terms of an organization of power: a world system in which economic processes are among the major manifestations of power.

Right-wing and Left-wing neo-mercantilisms can be distinguished. The coming to power of the Trilateral Commission in the United States with the Carter election in effect displaced tendencies towards a Right-wing mercantilism observable in the Kissinger- Nixon administration. The vision of a reunified Trilateral world as the anchor of a liberal world economy replaced the notion of a pentagonal organization of world power that seemed likely to become one of competing economic blocs. <mark>Kautsky's ultra-imperialism seemed to triumph over Lenin's rival imperialisms.</mark> Among the books considered here, the Right of neo-mercantilism in the United States is represented by Robert W. Tucker's *The Inequality of Nations*. He distrusts Trilateralism and argues for the defense of American power in a world in which the balance of power among nations has not ceased to operate. The Left of neo-mer-cantilism recognize the same basic framework of power, but write from a standpoint of sympathy with those who are challenging dominant power in the world economy. Two recent works are worth noting.

Michael Hudson, an unconventional American radical, has written *Global Fracture: The New International Economic Order*. This is a sequel to his earlier *Superimperialism*, in which he argued that the United States had organized a dominant imperial system in which government financial management played the crucial role. Global Fracture dates the decline of this empire from the crises of 1973 and the gradual emergence of a world of competing blocs (the U.S. sphere receding to the American hemisphere, a western Europe-Arab-African complex, a Japanese sphere in Southeast Asia, the Soviet sphere, and China––each with its own center-periphery dialectic). Its title and its message are in pointed contrast to the Global Reach of Barnet and Muller: powerful governments, not multinational corporations, are the dominant forces. The other book, intended as an academic textbook more than as a contribution to public debate, is La dialectique de la dépendence by André Tiano, representing a French tradition of economic thought in which the state has always been a principal actor, and which has never (like most Anglo-Saxon economics) been able to ignore Marxian analysis but has remained in constant dialogue with it. "La réalité internationale qu'il convent d'expliquer," Tiano writes at the beginning of his book, "n'est pas économique, politique, juridique, culturelle ou démographique. C'est un
"système" qui dans une connaissance idéale ne se plie à aucune fragmentation disciplinaire" (Tiano, p. 11). One of the modern greats of French economics, François Perroux, recently said (Le Monde, 27 June 1973), in a phrase consistent with Tiano's approach, "Il n'y a pas de sosie en économie . . . la loi est




















<br />

## Footnotes ##

[1]: Reviewers of this article suggested that I make my political position clear at the outset, a request that is fair yet difficult for me to comply with since I do not sit comfortably under any political label. I have thought of myself as a conservative, but to accept this designation is to risk association with those who have appropriated it to cloak an egoistic defense of acquired privilege. My conservatism is in the first place historicism, or the sense that ideas and events are bound together in structural totalities that condition the possibilities of change-what I understand Machiavelli to have meant by *necessitá*. My conservatism is also a commitment to a certain sense of right and equity for the underdog and a suspicion of the most recently established wealth and power-a pre-capitalist, Jacobite, anti-Whig conservatism. This makes me suspicious of all bureaucracies (though there are some good people who double as bureaucrats) whether governmental, corporate, international, or academic. I find some of the thought of the critical Left (to be distinguished from the new scholasticism of the official Left) more relevant to my concerns than anything on the Right or Center of today's political spectrum, though I am aware that many of those whose work I find helpful would regard my own historicism as a form of idealism. So much for the author's confessions.
The author is grateful for the critical comments offered by Robert Keohane, John Ruggie, and Peter Katzenstein.






