# Introduction

## By Debbie Brennan

It’s nearly a century since Hitler and Mussolini introduced the world to fascism’s horror, but the threat of its return has never gone away. That is a lifetime for most of us. The threat of fascism lies under or above the surface, depending on the conditions of the time. “Never Again!,” the call from political prisoners inside Dachau’s death camp, still rings as an international warning. Today the decibels are going up, especially as we watch Trump concentrate state power in his presidential hands to “make America great again.” His attempts to restore the United States’ global dominance while decimating long-held rights and rounding up immigrants feel like the beginning of something ominously familiar.

The good news is: The workers of the world have decades of resistance to draw on, and they are showing it. It is now a matter of recognising this, learning from it and building on it. Australia is rich with experience that Freedom Socialist Party (FSP), alongside our sister organisation Radical Women (RW), is proudly part of.

*The Fight against Fascism and the Far Right: Voices from the Front Lines* is a collection of articles from the Australian *Freedom Socialist Organiser* and its predecessor, the *Freedom Socialist Bulletin,* as well as the international *Freedom Socialist* newspaper. It presents FSP’s and RW’s history of organising in Australia and the U.S. since both organisations established national sections in 1983 and the 1960s respectively. These writings come straight from the trenches — such as the grassroots actions that ran National Action out of Melbourne’s northern suburbs in the 1990s; repeatedly trounced Nazis in the 20-teens; faced down misogynist, homophobic zealots, from the so-called Right to Life to the World Congress of Families; and continue to confront Trans Exclusionary Radical Feminists (TERFs) and their Nazi allies. It is further enriched by FSP’s and RW’s organising in the United States against these same globally-connected menaces.

Confronting fascists and the far right, whenever and wherever they appear, is crucial. But the writers don’t just report actions. They bring them to life with class-conscious clarity and often first-hand experience, informed by theory and historical lessons. They show each action as an important piece in constructing a movement capable of waging an offensive against these threats.

To do this, we need to know what we are fighting. Defining fascism is vital. It requires understanding both its crossover with and differentiation from the far right. Yet even within anti-fascist organising circles, all this is blurry. “Fascism" is often used as a synonym for authoritarianism or used as a swear word against unlikeable types, from rightwing politicians to anti-vaxxers.

The FSP is indebted to Marxist thinkers and anti-fascist fighters, such as Leon Trotsky, James P. Cannon and Daniel Guérin, for their scientific clarity on this historical phenomenon and its source. Contributors to *The Fight against Fascism and the Far Right* are able to identify triggers of fascism and how it could unfold today. We see how big capital would react to an economic and social crisis deep enough to ignite workers’ revolt. To save itself, capital’s elite will foster and fund a mass movement based on a disoriented, panicked middle class. It will no longer run the state through parliamentary democracy but through a demagogue using terror as the means of bringing control. We understand this movement as fascism, capitalism’s ultimate weapon aimed at its working class nemesis.

Through a revolutionary feminist lens, the writers show who are its targets. A men’s group, the Blackshirts, terrorises their ex-partners and children. United Patriots Front leader Blair Cottrell beheads the dummy of a Muslim. Nazis stand with TERFs outside Victoria’s Parliament House with a banner, “Destroy paedo freaks.” They disrupt social events for young trans people and drag Story Hours for kids. They parade through Melbourne, chanting “Australia for the white man.” They attack refugees fighting for permanent visas and First Nations who perform a smoking ceremony on Invasion Day. At Flinders Street Station they hold a banner, “Expose Jewish Power.” We learn why they go after uppity women, queers, trans folk, people with disability, Jews, First Peoples, immigrants and all people of colour, the homeless and poor. And why the union and socialist movements are the first in line to be wiped out.

The writers are careful to show that fascism is not here, but the conditions for such a movement evolve in economically unstable times, like now. The rise of a far right and emboldenment of fascist gangs are early signs of its possibility if it’s not nipped in the bud.

The necessity and power of the united front ties this collection together like a bold, bright red ribbon. Trotsky fought for this in Germany, arguing that such unity — initiated by the trade union and socialist movements and led by the working class — would prevent Nazism from winning power. Hitler’s admission that his embryonic movement could have been “crushed in the egg” corroborates this. Both movements’ refusal to work together left a legacy for us to overcome.

The united front that Trotsky outlined entails organisations cooperating on the basis of agreed principles. Socialists are indispensable as leaders experienced in mobilising and fighting back. But included in this unity must be organisations outside the Left — those representing oppressed targets, from trans people to refugees. All groups maintain their autonomy, and political differences are respected. In Trotsky’s words, they march separately and strike jointly.

We read about successful examples. After 15 months’ organising, the Campaign Against the Nazis expelled National Action from Fawkner in 1998. FSP members involved in this united community building had been inspired by the experience of our counterparts in the United Front Against Fascism in the U.S., which in the 1980s stopped the Aryan Nation from establishing a foothold in the Pacific Northwest.

However the sectarian disunity among unions and socialists that Trotsky fought against is still rife. Sectarianism elevates disagreements and one’s own organisation above the movement. This is what happened in Melbourne’s Campaign Against Racism and Fascism (CARF) from 2015 to 2018. Writings from this period recount the beginning, successes and end of this united front. CARF is a case study of how sectarian operating turns a united front into its opposite. While CARF still exists, it is no longer a united front, but one of Socialist Alternative’s various front groups.

FSP, RW and other founding organisations of CARF that left in 2018 formed *PUSH! Organising and educating to build a united front against fascism*. PUSH’s callout, included in this book, is still urgent now, more than ever.

The economic crises of Germany and Italy, following from their defeat in World War I, drove workers of those countries, inspired by the Russian Revolution, to revolt. Fascism was finance capital’s response. Today the global economy is in dire straits. Desperate and fed up with paying for capital’s problems, the exploited and abused are angry. This anger is manifesting in the rapidly growing solidarity with Palestine and movements for trans liberation, justice for refugees and First Nations, environmental salvation and union democracy. And these movements are connecting. Seeds of revolt are already sprouting.

“Never Again!” means we prepare. *The Fight against Fascism and the Far Right* is an important source for organisers, activists and anyone looking for answers. Luma Nichol, a leader of United Front Against Fascism and contributor to this book, sums it up: “The stakes are high, but we can and must build a united front to prevent fascism!”

This book leaves us in no doubt that “Never again!” ultimately means that we destroy capitalism.

June 2025 