# **Manning Clark on Music**

On 16 January 1988, three years before his death and in time for the bicentenary of the First Fleet’s landing, *Manning Clark’s History of Australia – The Musical* premiered at Melbourne's Princess Theatre. If remembered, it is often as an exemplary fizzer that incurred losses close to two million dollars. The show intertwined the lives of Clark and his wife Dymphna with those of his historical subjects. At the time, it was both fêted and fettered, and despite the crack team behind it ticket sales were poor. Facing an early end to the run, the cast held a rally and posed for a [photo](https://books.google.com.au/books?id=OitWAAAAIBAJ&pg=PA23#v=onepage&q&f=false). Their banner announced that [‘]History has a future.’ The show closed a few weeks later.

To shake off the cobwebs, John Rickard’s survey of the musical’s reception in the November 1988 edition of the *[[Victorian Historical Journal]{.underline}](https://find.slv.vic.gov.au/permalink/61SLV_INST/1dukq3j/alma9939652742907636)* provides a neat time capsule of opinion. In the show’s programme, Manning Clark seemed pleased, and Don Watson explained that the adaptation ‘had to be a musical’ for the form’s popularity and ‘the marvelous power of music.’ There were positive reviews in the *Australian* and the *Herald*, but negative press too. The *Sun* was acerbic, describing it as ‘more lost than Burke and Wills.’ The *Age* was more measured, but it still damned with faint praise. Almost twenty years later, Peter Fitzpatrick argued that the musical’s reception was an opening salvo in the Culture and History Wars. In his contribution to *Against the Grain*, Fitzpatrick admitted the show’s limitations but suggested that its downfall had more to do with politics than artistic failings. The cultural strut of the Hawke government had been caught on the wrong foot. Rickard thought that marketing and creative faults had to be acknowledged, that the failure was 'a theatrical and not a cultural one.'

Manning Clark was also a believer in the power of music, and this belief informed his history. Published posthumously in 1992, *A Historian’s Apprenticeship* never received the final draft he hoped for, but his views remained as lofty as ever. The historian’s task, as he saw it, was to 'bring the reader to the frontier where music takes over from words. It must make the reader want to hear music even though words never can be music.’ This quote appears in the epigraph to Michael Cathcart's masterful and merciful abridgement of Clark’s six-volume history. But on its surface, Clark’s history is not a musical one.

Clark was interested in the famous works of European music's common practice era, from the seventeenth to the twentieth century. He wanted readers to know that music had structured his magnum opus in which ‘all six volumes mirrored what went on in the mind and the heart when listening’ to his favourite pieces. The composers he listed, and the order in which they appear, are a musical smorgasbord: Bach, Satie, Beethoven, Chopin, Tchaikovsky, Sibelius, Monteverdi, and Puccini. To say nothing of the absences, that Satie is sandwiched between Bach and Beethoven reflects the tastes of a magpie.

As with his history, the sweep of Clark’s musical metaphor is often compelling, but the details can be wayward. He claimed that his writing followed ‘the sonata form in music – the statement of the theme, the development of this theme, the recapitulation and the coda.’ Aptly naming the sonata’s development and recapitulation, this description glosses the form’s motivic engine: the exposition and its twin themes. Such toying with music theory recalls Clark’s litany of factual indiscretions. However, his intuitions could sometimes lead him in the right direction. The sonata form, more thoroughly understood, has been compared to history before, especially histories concerned with conflict and resolution.

A sonata begins with two contrasting themes, initially played in different keys, and it is this harmonic friction that impels the music. Throughout the development section, the work’s motivic potential unfurls via several other tonalities. After those wanderings, the recapitulation airs the themes again, but they are now in the same key, and so the movement can close with a firm-handshake-like cadence. This is very rarely the end of the music. In a piano sonata, string quartet, or symphony, it is often only the first of several movements, and it might be the only movement that follows the sonata form at all. Though Clark’s summary downplayed a sonata’s staging of opposition its imperative of locomotion resonates with his approach to the past.

His imaginative spark was to see that although Australian society was riven by conflict people sometimes shook hands. He preferred spiritual conflicts to material ones, and so it was Christianity’s sectarian strife that animated him. In *A Historian’s Apprenticeship* Clark complained about histories built on class oppositions, or profits and losses. He did not point to any examples, but the rigorous and readable work of A.G.L. Shaw, Professor of Modern History at Monash University from 1964­–1981, offers one contemporary alternative to Clark’s idiosyncratic approach. Norman Etherington was unequivocal about Clark’s legacy in *ABR* no. [337](https://www.australianbookreview.com.au/abr-online/archive/2011/december-2011-january-2012-no-337/62-december-2011-january-2012/688-mark-mckenna-an-eye-for-eternity): his ‘time has passed, and his influence on the practice of historical research and writing is practically nil.’ The style is out of date, and his idealism is interminable. And yet Clark's ideas have reached beyond the academy, and his books have sold well, even if they have not necessarily been well read.

To explain the persistence of Clark's appeal it is now commonplace to trace his literary references and insist on his literary prose, but in the three decades since his death his musical interests have too often been treated as ornamental. This is surprising. Mark McKenna, Clark’s indispensable biographer, has made the most of music, and mentions it throughout his celebrated account, *An Eye for Eternity.* For *The Monthly* in March 2007, McKenna wrote that when he first read Clark, he 'did not rush off to read the work of other Australian historians' but hurried to listen to music. When he ‘went to Clark to look anything up, it was to find the pieces of music that he found inspiring.’ Music helped McKenna explain Clark’s freedom with sources, that he saw them ‘as something akin to a musical score, a mere form of notation upon which he would improvise, providing a magnificent libretto for another Clark oratorio.’ Though decidedly musical, this is a thoroughly mixed metaphor, and there are other alternatives in Clark’s own writing.

One of the works Clark mentioned throughout his life was Beethoven’s final piano sonata Op. 111 in C minor, and he was especially fond of its *arietta* second movement. For Clark, it ‘set bells tolling in the head, as I am lifted into another plane of being, another exaltation, another vision of what I would never see without the music and will never get down in words no matter how hard I try.’ Beethoven's music carried an imperative for the writer: ‘the story of humanity in Australia must approximate to that moment of serenity, or it is nothing worth.’ Such a reckoning with the ineffable became Clark’s own everlasting attempt, to echo Patrick White.

After reading White’s *Riders in the Chariot,* Clark wrote to the author in admiration. In the letter he compared the novel with Beethoven’s final piano sonata, especially the *arietta* second movement, and the similar sensation both gave him of having ‘climbed a mountain top.’ Included with his letter was Wilhelm Kempf’s recording of the Op. 111 sonata. The recording would have been appreciated, though it seems White had a broader musical palette than Clark. On news of good sales for *The Tree of Man*, the future Nobel Laureate bought recordings of Schoenberg, Berlioz, and Berg. In his biography of White, David Marr describes how the Schoenberg was neglected while Berg’s Violin Concerto was a constant companion during the writing of *Voss*. The conjunction is surprising at first: why would a work synthesising Schoenberg’s twelve-tone method with more traditional harmonic processes form the backdrop to White’s abortive colonial romance? The concerto’s subtitle ‘To the Memory of an Angel’ offers one clue, resonating with the disappearance of Voss, and his wilderness visions of Laura Trevelyan.

At the end of *Voss,* there is a scene that might well have appealed to Clark. After the explorer’s disappearance, an anonymous ‘young man with a slight talent for exhibiting himself had sat down at the piano and was reeling off dreamy waltzes.’ The piano intrudes on Laura Trevelyan’s consideration of sectarian violence, salvation and the ‘everlasting attempt.’ Trevelyan envies only the fighters’ conviction. Suddenly, accompanied by the piano’s strains, ‘several youths were daring to drift with several breathless girls.’ Voss might be lost, but the Christians still brawl, men still play piano, and young people still sway.

In the year that Clark dared to drift with Dymphna Lodewyckx, his own convictions were waking. In his memoir *The Quest for Grace*, Clark recalled Dymphna introducing him to Goethe’s *Faust,* and seeing singers transformed in arias from Mozart’s *The Magic Flute.* Musical evenings at the University of Melbourne’s Trinity College had already brought him to the late string quartets of Beethoven, where ‘no one said a word, though the Janet Clarke Hall contingent looked as though they understood.’ On those nights, John Behan, Doctor of Law and Warden of Trinity College at the University of Melbourne, stood before the initiates and announced the repertoire. With great reverence he wound the gramophone and lowered the stylus. Rather than use metal needles Behan preferred those of thorn wood. Being softer than the records themselves, the thorn needles were worn down with each rotation. They had to be replaced often but could be refashioned to follow the music’s unassuming rut. Clark’s flaws were many and real indeed, but his barbs scraped a hard-won tune.

In *Volume III* of his history Clark revived Ludwig Leichhardt, the vanished Prussian whose story inspired White’s *Voss* decades earlier. Clark’s description of Leichhardt could also describe himself: ‘He wanted to achieve “something exceptional on a grand scale”; he wanted a “heroic friendship” with another man; he wanted to play the piano well; he wanted to purify his soul and to bring it to perfection.’ To Clark’s mind though, Leichhardt was greedy for more than pianism and purity: he was ‘puzzled why God should plant in the heart of the same creature both a vision of His throne, and the insect of sensual lust.’ Clark was more all-eyes arachnid than insect, but he resonated with historical figures as riven as he.

Clark pursued his project with the faith and tenacity of Leichhardt, and in the end, he might also be lost to us. Even McKenna, unfailingly patient with his subject, admitted that he ‘sometimes had difficulty reading his work.’ Starting with music suggests a different motivation for engagement and so inverts Clark’s view of history at the frontier where music takes over from words. The music must make the listener want to read history.

Clark’s preoccupation with the *arietta* offers one way in, especially because it does not follow sonata form at all, working instead on the design of theme and variations. Clark’s faulty description of sonata form makes much more sense if read as a guide to this movement specifically. The *arietta* really does begin with the statement of the theme, and what Clark called the development might describe the variations. The voracious reader of Thomas Mann’s letters seems to have forgotten the famous lecture in *Doctor Faustus* on the sonata Op. 111 which culminates with the pronouncement that it was ‘the farewell of sonata form.’

The inspiration Clark took from this piece and his confusion about sonata form obscured a musical structure that might have better framed his work: the Renaissance operas of Monteverdi, one of the other composers mentioned in *A Historians Apprenticeship*. The word ‘*arietta’* means ‘little song,’ and had been used in that capacity in early opera. Whereas Beethoven’s *arietta* is not particularly songlike or little, Monteverdi wove these short airs with every other musical resource at his disposal to create dramatic climaxes and provide melodies that lodged in the mind.

Clark’s vision was of ‘the human scene,’ and his stage was the Australian continent, but he deployed every trope he could to animate the ‘dry-as-dust.’ A good example of his set-piece method is the extract from *Volume V* of his history, republished as *Manning Clark On Gallipoli* in 2005*.* To present the pitch of anti-German sentiment in 1915, Clark drew on the non-renewal of teaching contracts for ‘any unnaturalised citizen’ at the University of Melbourne. <mark class='user-name_1738276496065' id='user-name_1738276496065' data-listener-attached='true'>This included</mark>, he tells us, Eduard Scharf, ‘a piano player of some distinction and a very gentle teacher of the art of playing this most difficult instrument.’ To sound Australia’s ‘patriotic fervour’ he spotlights Dame Nellie Melba’s fundraising concert in 1914, where ‘Australia’s great native daughter sang not one word about her own country. She sang excerpts from grand opera, and songs from the British Isles.’ *On Gallipoli* concludes with Henry Lawson lost for words. Gallipoli gave us no songs that could compare with the *Marseillaise* of the French Revolutionary Wars.

Clark looked back with regret in *A Historian’s Apprenticeship* on his earlier depiction of the ‘First Fleet as a Noah's Ark of civilization.’ He admitted that he had failed to understand the violence done to First Nations peoples and had overlooked the environmental ruin of sheep and cattle. He was also frustrated to have missed the piano brought onboard the *Sirius* by George Worgan. Though the biblical animals descended on Mount Ararat in pairs, just one piano tumbled out of the ark of convicts. Worgan’s piano is better known now, but Clark asked a novel question: ‘was the music of Mozart heard then under those gum trees of Sydney Cove which had previously heard only the folded-leaf whistle, the clapsticks and the rhythmic stamping of human feet?’ Here was a musical opposition. Clark never asked what it would have meant if Mozart’s music had accompanied the dispossessors. Today, it is difficult to ignore the Sydney Opera House fluttering where a small brick hut once stood as a gesture of corseted goodwill from Arthur Phillip to Bennelong, a short walk from the First Fleet’s landing.

The piano that got away from Clark, and the musical scene he overlooked, demands a rethinking of this country’s history through music and sound. It is a surprising turn, partly because Australian history has often been thought of as particularly unmusical, and Clark himself was an influential proponent of this view. His address to the International Musicological Society in 1979 was emphatic. There was no music that he felt expressed ‘a great cry both of anguish and of acceptance and resignation in the presence of such a malign and inhospitable environment.’ Playing to the audience, he concluded with the declaration that the experience of Australia ‘can only probably be done justice to by great music.’

In his 1976 Boyer Lectures, Clark broadcast the similar view that ‘we never created a distinctive music which one can listen to feeling that it conveys what it is like to be a human being in Australia.’ Even when he discussed the craft of history in these lectures, he used music and musicians to voice his hunches. He found sympathy with Ralph Vaughan Williams’ description of composing as ‘a rum go,’ and with Bach’s open secret that it was just ‘hard work.’ The work never became easier, but Clark had realised that the academic mode was not for him. Earlier attempts at writing Australian history had faltered with what he described as ‘genuflexions in the direction of Mr. Dry-As-Dust.’ However, those attempts helped him find the story he wanted to tell, and he used music there too.

He wanted to tell ‘a story about the coming of a great civilisation, a civilisation which had produced Bach’s Mass in B minor, to an ancient barbaric continent, and what that contact did to that civilisation and its people, and what those people did to each other.’ This rings with the rhetoric of nineteenth century sources. The 1837 *Report of the Parliamentary Select Committee on Aboriginal Tribes*, for example, was concerned with how best ‘to promote the spread of Civilization’ and how to achieve ‘the peaceful and voluntary reception of the Christian Religion.’ However retrograde, Clark thought this process and its violence had made Australians unique, and that this was legible in literature, though not yet intelligible in Australian music.

He found it in the writing of Adam Lindsey Gordon and Marcus Clarke and these writers were on his mind as he worked on the fourth volume of *A History of Australia,* published three years after the Boyer Lectures. The description of Marcus Clarke mourning Adam Lindsey Gordon in *Volume IV* carries the lived experience of grieving through music: ‘For years after Gordon’s death, Marcus Clarke hummed the lines of “The Sick Stock Rider” at the piano, while the tears kept rolling down his cheeks. For he had loved Gordon as only a man of imagination can love another man.’ It is a scene replete with himself, and his own heavy heart bearing the losses of dear friends.

Pianos feature elsewhere in *Volume IV* and are used to explain something about the Australian character and the nineteenth-century patriarchal home. He imagined that the piano had stamped Australians, not only keeping them occupied during the dreary months but arming them with amiable dispositions. Violence hid behind this exterior too. He noted that ‘in the houses of the more prosperous a piano provided a focal point for togetherness and Australian cheerfulness.’ The cramped manner of living, Clark claimed in the next sentence, ‘strengthened the authority of the father over the children.’ The paragraph ends a few lines later with a woman being hanged, because in such a society ‘no matter how barbarous the punishment, the good name of the family must be preserved.’ Men and pianos were united more closely and critically in Marcus Clarke’s *For the Term of His Natural Life* when one character ‘seems to have absorbed all his wife’s vitality \[...\] There is not a nerve in his body which does not twang like a piano wire.’ This could just as well describe Manning Clark in the early 1970s.

In 1972 Clark’s infatuations and affairs had driven Dymphna from home. That she had left, and he stayed owed a lot to the life he led in Canberra. Dymphna wrote: ‘how could you be expected to leave your books, your study, your music, your piano?’ The piano was Dymphna’s really, inherited from her grandmother, but it was Clark who became its student in his fifties, just a few years before this rupture. She returned the following year. McKenna explains that this was thanks to the intervention of a family friend, and more for the children still at home than for Manning.

For all his self-mythologising, Clark earned McKenna’s assessment that he ‘was a daddy-long-legs spinning his thread.’ This is not, or not only, a criticism. This introduced species of spider haunts the national furniture and is often found under the couch or behind the piano, particularly if they are stored in the shed. It is reminiscent of Clark’s assessment of the field in a 1954 lecture ‘Rewriting Australian History’: ‘in comparison with religion and music, history has not been one of the great comforters of mankind. But our ideas of the past are part of that great enormous attic of the mind.’ What is made of this spindly dreamer depends a great deal on disposition, but it is time to bring the pianos back inside, spiders and all.   