---
Author: Raúl Prebisch and UNCTAD
Title: Towards a New Trade Policy for Development
Date: 1964
---

# Raul Prebisch (1964). [*Towards a New Trade Policy for Development*](https://archivo.cepal.org/pdfs/cdPrebisch/121.pdf) # 

## general statement on Declining Terms of Trade ##
"From the standpoint of the developing countries, the Conference will be particularly concerned with a phenomenon that was a subject of controversy until recently, but which is today a matter of understandable general concern: the persistent tendency towards external imbalance associated with the development process. The phenomenon is already well known. While primary commodity exports are, with a few exceptions, expanding relatively slowly, demand for imports of manufactured goods is tending to grow rapidly, at a pace that increases with the rate of development. The resulting imbalance creates a serious external bottleneck which makes development difficult. The imbalance must be rectified if development is to be accelerated in conditions of dynamic equilibrium." p. 3.

## international cooperation needed to bring about economic growth ##
"One of the main objectives of the United Nations Development Decade is the attainment of a minimum annual growth rate of 5 per cent in the income of the developing countries by 1970. This is certainly a rather modest target and not much higher than the average rate of 4.4 per cent registered in the 1950's. Nevertheless, it will be extremely difficult—if not impossible—for many of the developing countries to achieve and maintain this rate of growth <ins>unless the present Conference brings about a policy of international co-operation that would make it possible to eliminate the imbalance in trade.</ins>" pp. 3-4.

"What are the implications of the 5 per cent minimum growth target for international trade? First and foremost, it should not be expected that, if the income of all developing countries is to rise at the minimum by 5 per cent every year, their imports can increase at a rate much less than 6 per cent. One of the main reasons for this is that any acceleration in the rate of growth requires additional investment; and the import content of this investment is normally much higher than that of income as a whole. Consequently, it is not going too far to conclude that imports would have to rise at a rate somewhat higher than that of total income. This view is supported by estimates based on the experience of developing countries.

The second implication of the 5 per cent growth target is that exports of the developing countries would also have to rise at the rate of 6 per cent per annum, in order to maintain balance-of-payments equilibrium. More precisely, a volume of exports should rise at a rate which, after allowing for changes in the terms of trade, would pay for a volume of imports increasing each year at a rate of 6 per cent.

As we all know, experience during the 1950's was highly unsatisfactory in this respect. The annual rate of growth in export volume of the developing countries during that decade was only 4 per cent per annum, and, if the petroleum-exporting countries are excluded, the average is significantly lower. At the same time, the terms of trade deteriorated, so that the purchasing power of exports over imports rose more slowly still, by under 2 per cent per annum.

Thus, even at existing rates of growth there is a widening gap in the • balance of payments of the developing countries; at higher rates of growth • consistent with the objectives of the Development Decade, the gap would » be even greater if the trends of the 1950's continued.

This, then, has to be the starting-point of the Conference. One cannot posit a 5 per cent rate of development without accepting also all the consequences that this implies for the rates of growth of imports and exports.

There are many ways, of course, in which the external resources of the developing countries could be increased: through additional exports of primary products, through more exports of manufactures, or through greater external aid. To some extent, each of these possible solutions is a substitute for the others. To the extent that one fails in solving the problem under one heading, one increases the burden to be borne under other headings. For example, in so far as one fails to secure any significant improvement in the rate of growth of exports of developing countries, recourse must be had to a greater inflow of international finance. And within any given target rate of increase in exports as a whole, the less that is done to widen market opportunities for foodstuffs and raw materials, the greater need will there be to open up new markets for manufactures. A combination of interdependent elements is involved; and it is an essential condition for success that the various measures adopted should be integrated within an over-all policy for achieving the desired result.

<mark> Unless these measures are adopted, the trade gap of the developing countries will be immense;</mark> available estimates show that, if the factors responsible for the present trend in world trade continue, the trade gap may reach an order of magnitude of about $20 billion[1] by 1970 if the growth rate of 5 per cent is to be achieved. This gap is potential and not real: <mark> if the means of bridging the gap are not found, the developing countries will be forced to reduce their rates of growth unless they are prepared to achieve higher rates at an excessive economic and social cost involving serious political consequences.</mark>

The rate of growth of 5 per cent per annum, set as an objective of the Development Decade, can in no sense be considered fully satisfactory. It would mean an annual rate of increase of only 2.6 per cent in the average per capita income of the peripheral countries in view of the rapid rate of population growth, which is higher than in any previous era and makes it all the more difficult to expedite development.

Nearly half of the capital invested in the developing countries is needed to provide for the increase in population, thereby limiting the resources available for substantially and steadily raising the over-all level of living. <mark> Unless the present tempo of population growth slows down,[2] it would take eighty years at an annual rate of growth of 5 per cent for the developing countries to reach the current average per capita income level of western Europe, and approximately forty years more for them to reach that of the United States. For the least advanced countries, accounting for one half of the population of developing areas, the period required to reach the present western European level would be of the order of two hundred years.</mark>

A 5 per cent annual rate of growth could therefore be considered acceptable only for a short transitional period in which to create the internal and international conditions required for accelerated development.

On the other hand, even if a fall in the rate of population growth were to help in alleviating certain problems and tensions, it would in no sense be an excuse for slackening rather than intensifying the domestic development effort or for narrowing the scope of international co-operation; rather should it provide an opportunity for accelerating development so that its basic objectives may be attained in a shorter period of time, a period that is politically and socially acceptable.

The potential of modern technology is so enormous that the developing countries should not have to wait as long as the present industrially advanced countries had to wait to develop their technologies step by step and use them for the eradication of poverty and its inherent evils. Indeed, they cannot wait as long, because the acceleration of their development is an absolute necessity that brooks no delay. The pressure exerted by the masses for real improvements in their levels of living has never been as strong as it is now, <mark> and in the years to come it will become a growing source of internal and world-wide tension if it is not met by a vigorous policy of economic and social development in which international co-operation must play a decisive role.</mark>

That is, if international cooperation to help with development of the poor states does not occur, and these problems are therefore not fixed, it will or could, become a problem for all countries.

The obstacles which the economic and social structures of the peripheral countries place in the way of development policy are well known. It is quite clear that important decisions must be taken to bring about structural changes, as has been indicated in previous reports of the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Suffice it to state here that, without such structural changes, and without a determined political effort to promote development and remove the internal obstacles from its path, measures of international co-operation, however good in themselves, will be very limited in their effect." pp. 4-6.

### Prebisch views the 19th century era as one of free trade in which industrialization in Britain led to economic growth in the peripheries. This phenomenon is not repeated, however, following the depression, because of a turn inwards by industrial states, and because of changes in the nature of agriculture, which now is more industrialized (so requires more industrial imports): ###

'The situation can be presented simply in the following terms. During the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the United Kingdom, as the world's leading dynamic centre, accounted for 36 per cent of world exports of manufactures and 27 per cent of the imports of primary commodities. Since the historical accident of the industrial revolution happened in the United Kingdom before it did in other parts of the world, that country, with its limited resources and given its level of technology at the time, had to grow outwards and there emerged the classic pattern of exchanging manufactured goods for primary commodities. Imports of primary goods and other commodities by the United Kingdom grew apace, as did their share in the national income: the over-all import coefficient rose from approximately 18 per cent in 1850 to the very high figure of almost 36 per cent in 1880-84, as a result of free trade. This phenomenon influenced the rest of Europe, although not to the same extent, and its effects on the development of countries on the periphery of the world economy were striking.

Actually the process was the opposite of that which has gradually come into existence since the end of the First World War and especially since the great depression: the substitution of imports of food and raw materials for domestic production and not vice versa.
 
There was another factor which encouraged the growth of consumption and primary commodity imports: these imports were not yet subject to the adverse effects of technological progress as they would be in later years. Per capita income was still able to sustain an active demand for foodstuffs, synthetic production of raw materials had not yet begun on a larger scale, and European farmers still clung to their traditional methods." p. 7.

### Discussing economic history, Prebisch praises the United States and EU's move away from protectionism, praising the need for an "international division of labour", that is, a more globally efficient distribution of industrialisation: ###

'A new order is thus emerging among the more advanced industrialized States and the next few years will reveal its ultimate significance more clearly: it remains to be seen whether this new order will be one in which vast regions withdraw into their shells and isolate themselves with a minimum of trade between them, or whether it will be one in which they take advantage of a closer economic link involving new forms of the international division of labour.
 
Hence the vital significance of the massive cut in tariffs proposed by the late President Kennedy for the next round of GATT negotiations. The success of these negotiations among the advanced countries which conduct their trade relations mainly by means of tariffs will thus have a considerable influence on the future development of the world economy.

The EEC authorities have repeatedly affirmed the outward-looking character of their economic policy, a position which coincides with that of the United States. There has been a gradual relaxation of that country's traditional protectionism and it is to be hoped that this new policy can now enter upon a very broad phase.

The socialist States of CMEA have also repeatedly expressed their support of the principle of the international division of labour. The success of the Kennedy round and the improvement in the international political atmosphere could considerably facilitate the adoption of formulae which would enable the socialist countries to play an active part in world trade by removing the obstacles which obstruct their participation. This refers not only to relations between them and other industrially advanced countries, irrespective of the differences in their economic and social systems, but also to relations with the developing countries, in view of the interdependence of world trade." pp. 8-9.

### Prebisch then criticises import-substitution (inward focused) approaches to development. Because of problems of national scale, and because import substitution leads to increases in the import of imports not taxed, and because of problems with the declining terms of trade, these policies can not keep up with the debt repayments on the loans needed. That is, industrial growth is outpaced, under import substitution done nationally, by international problems. ###

'All this is highly important for the developing countries, but it is far from enough, as will be seen later. What was happening in those countries after the great depression, while such significant changes were taking place in the industrial countries?

The break-down of the old pattern of trade created new problems for the developing countries. The persistent trend towards external imbalance began, first, as a result of the contraction of their exports during the great depression and, later as a result of their slow rate of growth. From the outset, a number of countries tried to counteract this imbalance by means of import substitution, i.e., by inward-looking industrialization, without foreign markets, and later, after the Second World War, by continuing this policy without interruption and by drawing on the international financial resources made available to them.

The external imbalance was thus covered, but in a precarious manner in the countries which at that time were pushing ahead with their industrialization. As time went on, the consequences of this system became increasingly apparent. Industrialization encounters growing difficulties in the countries where it is pursued furthest. These difficulties arise from the smallness of national markets and also from the following peculiar fact. The further substitution proceeds in respect of some imports, the more other imports grow because of the heavier demand for capital goods and, subsequently, because of the effects of higher income. In addition to this pressure, the adverse effects of the decline in the terms of trade in recent years have weakened the effectiveness of financial contributions from international sources.

Furthermore, these contributions entail a heavy burden of servicing which is mounting rapidly, mainly owing to the amount of amortization in respect of relatively short-term credits. Thus servicing competes with an active demand for imports for the relatively scanty supply of foreign exchange earned by exports.

This phenomenon has no historical parallel. The old pattern of international trade, as it existed in the nineteenth century, was characterized, as has already been pointed out, by a strong and steady growth in exports, which provided the means for servicing debts. Any difficulties which arose were due not to structural defects, as now, but rather to financial misbehaviour or short-term cyclical contractions. In addition to all this, there is the mounting burden of external payments for maritime freight and insurance. The developing countries own only 6 per cent of the world maritime tonnage and this creates a series of problems. Moreover, while the system of shipping conferences may be explained by the very nature of sea transport, it involves combines that restrict competition and affects the developing countries as regards both the cost of services and the impact of this cost on various products depending on their degree of processing. The desire to extend import substitution policy to these services is therefore very understandable, but the information so far available in support of this policy is very meagre. All this necessitates further inquiry, and it is to be hoped that the information needed for the purpose will be forthcoming.

This is a characteristic picture of many of the developing countries, especially those where industrialization has made most headway. None of the others, however, is, over the short or long term, immune to the persistent tendency towards imbalance, except in certain exceptional cases; and what is now happening in the more industrialized developing countries foreshadows what will happen in the others unless a conscious and deliberate effort is made to influence the course of economic events and to apply the enlightened policy which those events have made imperative." pp. 10-11.

### The only conclusion from all this is for Prebisch is that: the developing states need freer trade, and international cooperation, so that the declining terms of trade can be defeated through a new international division of labour in which they are able to industrialise, and that this will help the advanced states as well. ###

# PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTS AND THE DETERIORATION IN THE TERMS OF TRADE: 1. THE SLOW GROWTH OF EXPORTS # 

'As has been pointed out, the trend towards external imbalance in the developing countries is mainly a manifestation of the disparity between the rate of growth of their primary exports and that of their imports of industrial goods. While primary exports, with certain exceptions, develop fairly slowly, demand for industrial imports tends to accelerate. This is a spontaneous feature of economic development.

The slow growth of primary exports is an inevitable results of technological progress in the industrial centres. On the one hand, there are direct consequences, since technological progress leads to the increasing substitution of synthetics for natural products; and it is also reflected in one way or another in the smaller raw material content of finished goods. On the other hand, there are indirect consequences, since only a small part of the increased per capita income generated by technological progress goes into the demand for foodstuffs and other staple consumer goods, as compared to the demand for industrial goods and services which tends to rise rapidly. It is significant, for example, that, in absolute terms, total consumption of wheat in the United States has remained almost constant since the beginning of the century, in spite of the rise in both population and per capita income.


The declining terms of trade arises when industrialisation spreads from industry itself (manufactures) to agriculture, and is disruptive to the old division of labour, whereby the periphery provided raw materials.
To all these developments must be added the remarkable effects of the propagation of modern agricultural techniques in the advanced countries.

'One of the characteristics of technological progress is that it has not permeated all productive activities or all countries evenly, a fact which largely explains the structural differences and consequent contrasts and disparities in the development process. Until fairly recent times, technological progress was confined to industrial production and had not spread to agriculture to any great extent, except for mechanization. Finally, however, the technological revolution reached this lagging sector, first in the United States and then in Europe. Modern farming techniques made rapid headway and in fact agriculture is becoming industrialized; thus, new dynamic elements are being introduced into the economic complex, at both the internal and the international levels. <mark> The old pattern of trade, under which less developed countries were the suppliers of agricultural exports, is undergoing a change which may become permanent and thus help to develop new forms of the international division of labour.</mark>' p. 11.

### This trend is being worsened, and the change to new international division of labour hindered, by damaging protectionist measures in the core countries. (That is, efficient distribution of division of labour is hindered by destructive market interventions in the north): ###

'It so happens, however, that the enormous increase in output that has ensued in some major industrial countries, has further weakened the export trade in a number of agricultural products from the temperate zones and also in some tropical or semi-tropical products. And here a very significant fact emerges which is not the inevitable result of technological progress but of political attitudes towards this progress, attitudes that are certainly capable of being changed. In spite of the huge increases in productivity, domestic prices in the industrial countries concerned usually stay higher—and often much higher—than those on the international market. In this way, or through the payment of subsidies to farmers, the adverse effects of technological progress on prices are countered. But this policy also provides an additional incentive to expand production, and the expansion is often carried out on marginal holdings and at excessive costs. In order to guarantee a domestic consumer market for the increased output, imports from other producing countries are restricted or eliminated by various devices that are not always compatible with the provisions of GATT. If this encouragement results in exportable surpluses, such surpluses are exported by means of subsidies or other incentives which tend to depress world prices, while other producing countries are unable to follow suit because of the very weakness of their economies.

Hence, the tendency of the terms of trade to deteriorate occurs in the case of the highly industrialized countries too, largely as a result of technological progress and in spite of their economic strength. This tendency is the outcome of the well-known readjustment difficulties experienced by primary production which are aggravated by technological progress, as will be explained in the relevant part of this report.

The measures adopted in those countries and the social motives underlying them are understandable: they do not wish the benefits of greater productivity to be transferred to other sectors to the detriment of producers. It is not this policy we have to discuss but rather the fact that the harmful effects of such measures on the primary exporting countries do not appear to have been taken sufficiently into account. <mark>It is possible to conceive of a price or income policy which does not encourage marginal production in the industrialized countries and which guarantees the developing countries a reasonable share in consumption. In other words, we should visualize a policy which does not seek to solve the domestic problems of the industrial countries by aggravating the problems of the developing countries.</mark>

The restrictive measures applied to imports by the industrial countries cover the whole vast range of primary items except for those which, by their nature, cannot be produced domestically in these countries.

In western Europe, cereals and meats, milk products, vegetable fats and oils, sugar and other foodstuffs are thus well-protected by fixed or flexible tariffs and import quotas. Thanks to this protection, it is possible to pay domestic producers, as stated above, prices much higher than those prevailing on the international market, or to grant them substantial sub-"p. 12.
"sidies. While the effects on consumption vary, depending on the nature of the measures adopted, all these measures serve to stimulate increased domestic production at the expense of imports, which have thus dropped to a level where they are merely residual." p. 13.

### protectionist measures create surpluses which further act downward on prices of developing states raw material exports ###
"In the United States, too, the impact of protectionism is significant and is intensified, in the case of some agricultural products, by the sale of surpluses abroad, which, despite efforts to prevent them from invading traditional markets, have a harmful effect on other producing countries." p.13.

### Further elaboration on how these protectionist measures do infact add to declining terms of trade (counters arguments made by critics) ###
"It is often asserted that the weight of the restrictive measures applied to agricultural products from the temperate zones falls mainly on the primary exports of industrial countries and that they consequently have little effect on developing countries. But there are two reasons why this is not so. The first is that certain Latin American and Mediterranean developing countries which export such temperate-zone products are seriously affected by these restrictions. The other is that the sale of surpluses in world markets often displaces tropical or semi-tropical products. One example is rice in the consumption of countries of the Far East and Canada. Furthermore, oils and fats from the industrial countries are tending to oust imports from developing countries; temperate-zone fruits are tending to take the place of tropical varieties; and the competition between beet sugar and cane sugar is seriously harming the developing countries, as are highly subsidized exports of cotton, maize and tobacco from industrial countries.

In addition to the foregoing, the following consideration must also be borne in mind. International trade cannot be arbitrarily fragmented, and the unfavourable effect that sales of surpluses have on exports from other developed countries also impairs their capacity to import from the developing countries.

Thus, for example, the difficulties experienced by such countries as Australia, Canada, the United States and New Zealand are bound to affect the ability and willingness of these countries to open up their internal markets to larger shipments from developing countries.

Tropical products are not subject to import restrictions in the markets of the industrial countries, but their consumption is discouraged in some of them by internal taxes which are usually more than the value of the items imported. Furthermore, the preferences granted to certain countries which export these tropical products are detrimental to the interests of other developing countries.

Imports of many mineral products tend to rise as industrial development progresses. This is happening in the countries of western Europe, which continue to depend on imports for most of their requirements in minerals and non-ferrous metals, while the United States has become a net importer rather than a net exporter of this group of products. Nevertheless, the United States continues to restrict imports in the interest of domestic production of lead, zinc and petroleum. Similarly, certain coal-"p. 13.
"producing western European countries levy duties and taxes on petroleum products that compete most directly with coal." p. 14.

### But eliminating protectionism in the North won't itself be enough to remove the declining terms of trade, this won't be able to be achieved by the developing states on their own, must require international cooperation. ###

'The easing or elimination of protectionism in the industrial centres could have a far-reaching effect on the prices of the goods benefiting thereby. But it would be idle to believe that this can have any decisive effect on the downward trend of the terms of trade for primary commodities in relation to industrial products, which has again prevailed in the past decade. The factors operating in this direction have deeper roots in the peripheral countries than in the industrial centres. The former suffer from a congenital weakness that makes it extremely difficult, if not impossible, for the deterioration to be checked by a decision on their part and on their part alone.' p. 14.

### As industrialisation of agriculture increases, the number of workers employable will decrease, necessitating the need for industrial employment ###

'Owing to the slowness of the growth of demand for primary commodities, only a dwindling proportion of the increment in the economically active population in the developing countries can be absorbed in their production, and the more productivity in primary activities rises as a result of the assimilation of advanced techniques, the smaller will that proportion be. The economically active population therefore has to be shifted to industry and other activities.

This shift is a lengthy process, even in the industrial countries where the proportion of the economically active population employed in primary production is already relatively small. Hence the phenomena discussed above. If the switch-over were effected rapidly and primary production were quick to adjust itself to the slow growth of demand, one of the requisites for obviating the deterioration of the terms of trade would be fulfilled.

For this to happen, industry and other sectors would have to develop very rapidly in the peripheral countries and achieve a rate of growth much higher than that heretofore attained in those countries, particularly if efforts to introduce advanced techniques into primary production and other low-productivity activities were intensified.


### decline in terms of trade occurs because of surplus labour in developing states, which means that wages in agriculture do not increase with productivity, as compared with wages in industrial states, which do increase because of productivity, thus the prices of industrial products increase relative to prices of developing state agricultural prices, and this is further exagerated by developing state tariffs. ###

"The magnitude of this process is indeed enormous. It should be remembered that, although there are differences from country to coun-"p. 14.
<mark>"try, about 60 per cent, on the average, of the economically active population of the developing countries is still engaged in agriculture and other branches of primary production, working generally at a low rate of productivity, and that to this figure must be added that part of the economically active population engaged in artisan activities and personal services at very low scales of remuneration. All these sectors of the population exert constant pressure on the real level of wages in the developing countries and make it extremely difficult for this level to rise in direct proportion to productivity as the latter improves with technological progress. The increase in income generated by higher productivity in the agricultural sector thus tends to shift to other parts of the domestic market or abroad, as the case may be, provided that the shortage of available land does not absorb the increase in income by raising the rent for the benefit of landowners and provided that the play of market forces is left undisturbed.</mark>
### this seems to imply a big problem is simply the nation state itself ###

"In the industrial countries, on the other hand, the relative shortage of labour and strong trade-union organization allow wages not only to rise as productivity increases but even, as often happens, to outstrip the increase.

Thus there is a fundamental disparity in these trends. It is a consequence of the structural differences between industrial centres and peripheral countries and it explains the tendency of the terms of trade to worsen. The protection enjoyed by the primary commodities of the industrial centres obviously encourages this tendency because it accentuates the disparity between demand for primary commodities in the centres and demand for imports of manufactures in the periphery." p. 15.

### the trend in declining terms of trade can reverse for short periods of time, but after increases of production respond, will reemerge again ###

<mark>"This should not be regarded as an immutable law. It is a trend which can be slowed down or halted when the demand for primary commodities in the major centres expands very rapidly either because of the speed with which income rises or because of extraordinary requirements, and it cannot be immediately followed by a corresponding expansion in primary production. The terms of trade will then become favourable; and if, as is usually the case, both land and manpower are available, production will expand to the point where it exceeds demand and the tendency of the terms of trade to deteriorate will reappear, particularly if techniques which increase productivity are applied and the demand of the industrial countries is restricted at the same time." p. 15.</mark>
### This is exactly what happened in 1973-1975-ish ### 

### goal of "Dynamic Equilibrium" will take a long time ### 
<mark>"With an effort of the imagination it is possible to visualize a situation of dynamic equilibrium in the distant future in which the trend in question disappears as a result of the world-wide process of industrialization. If the advanced centres themselves have not yet succeeded in reaching that stage, the countries on the periphery of the world economy can hardly be expected to do so within a short space of time. The readjustment will come about in the end when the structural change is completed, but the period of transition will be very long. In the meantime, it is precisely through this period of transition that the present and" p. 15.
"successive generations are destined to live, and it is those generations which will have to bring about the change. The change will also require capital formation on a vast scale, to say nothing of time. In the developed economies, capital formation, intrinsically very strong, is facilitated by the very increase in productivity which accompanies technological progress, whereas in the developing countries, owing to the transfer abroad of income caused by the deterioration in the terms of trade, the capacity for capital formation, intrinsically very feeble, will be further diminished." p. 16.</mark>

### Solutions to the problem ### 
"It is obvious that, if technological progress in primary production is intensified and if technology in the developing countries also undergoes a revolution, without which they cannot grow faster, the tendency of the terms of trade to deteriorate may be even stronger than in the recent past. This is not a prediction. But, what factors can we descry on the economic horizon that are capable of countering this tendency?

### Commodity agreements and compensatory financing ### 
"There are various ways in which this can be done: by means of commodity agreements, which not only improve prices but also facilitate access to the markets of the industrial countries, or by compensatory financing. These are in fact convergent measures, the nature of which will be analysed in the appropriate part of this report. Suffice it to say here that there are difficulties but that they can be solved. However, for the technical discussion to be profitable, it must be preceded by a political decision of the first importance, namely, a decision to transfer, in one way or another, to the countries exporting primary commodities the extra income accruing to the industrial countries as a result of the deterioration in the terms of trade.

From a pragmatic point of view this means recognizing that countries experiencing a deterioration in the terms of trade have a prima facie claim upon additional international resources—resources over and above those which they would have received in the normal course of events.

Some aspects of this matter are rather delicate and might lead the discussion on to barren ground unless we keep these pragmatic considerations uppermost in our minds. Practically speaking, the position is this. The foreign earnings of the developing countries have suffered severely from the deterioration in the terms of trade. Unless these countries succeed in obtaining additional resources, they will be unable to achieve the reasonable rate of growth set as a target in their plans. The situation will be worse still if the terms of trade deteriorate further in the future.

Additional resources, then, are indispensable, and it is the purpose of compensatory financing to provide them through such a transfer, in so far as the purpose is not achieved through higher prices. <mark>This would give economic development plans a large measure of stability which can certainly not be achieved by expedients designed simply to cushion the impact of fluctuations in exports, although such expedients are an important step in the right direction.</mark> These plans will have to be reviewed whenever necessary in order to deal with the consequences of deterioration. In other words, compensatory operations must be an integral part of a more rational policy for financing development." p. 17.








### VERY ESSENTIAL ARGUMENT: There is a fundamental need to industrialise in all developing countries. However, the old model of import substitution, where protectionist measures enabled a country to industrialise on commodities which they could not actually make cheaper than foreign imports, which was necessary during the 1930s and onwards as the international environment was not propitious, has had severe problems, and in any case, has come to a logical end, as it reaches a point in which imports can no longer be substituted in a way that allows industrialisation for local markets. In its place, therefore, the world needs to work together to create free-er trade, so that the developing countries can use still some protectionist measures, but for an export market. In this way, the benefits of comparative advantage etc would still be apparent. I copy this bit in full because it is really lucid: ###

# "1. INWARD-LOOKING INDUSTRIALIZATION #

If the peripheral countries manage to secure a larger share for their primary exports in the consumption of the industrial countries, this, together with the transfer of income from the latter countries to the former to offset the effects of the deterioration in the terms of trade, will help to narrow the trade gap but will not in itself be enough to close it. These measures will be palliatives, and the relief they afford, though considerable in some cases, will be of limited scope owing to the size of the gap. Hence, the absolute necessity of building up trade in industrial exports. Exports of manufactures ought to have been the natural complement of the industrialization of the peripheral economies. But it would not have been easy to develop such exports in the very midst of the world slump of the 1930's, when industrialization was beginning to gain momentum in a number of peripheral countries. At that time, the industrial countries, as has already been stated, were obliged to adopt measures severely restricting their imports. Would they, in those circumstances, have permitted the entry of industrial exports from developing countries when they were placing such serious barriers in the way of the latter's primary exports?

Some developing countries, too, had to protect themselves in those days by applying similar measures in order to offset the shrinkage of their export trade and, later, the patent and persistent tendency of that trade to expand slowly.

Thus protected, industrialization began to gain momentum, rather as a defensive reaction aimed at overcoming adverse circumstances and external imbalance than as a clearly conceived and rational design.

A process thus took shape that was very different from the one that had characterized the emergence of new industrialized countries from the latter half of the nineteenth century onwards following the example originally set by the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom at that time applied no protectionist tariffs; they were, generally speaking, relatively low in the European countries; and in the peripheral countries they either did not exist or usually served fiscal purposes. In this propitious international setting, industrialization was able to turn outwards, in addition to satisfying internal requirements. And in this way the countries in process of industrialization reaped the benefits of specialization and of an adequate scale of production. Industrialization thus proceeded in an environment of expanding international trade.

The contrast with what happened after the great depression is striking. Circumstances compelled industrialization to turn inwards like a simple import substitution process—simple but generally costly. Could there have been any alternative? Could the industrialized countries, in their efforts to fight the depression with tariffs and other restrictions, conceivably have encouraged imports of industrial goods from the peripheral regions? Of course not. Nor is it at all likely, given the ease with which domestic production could be geared to import substitution under strong protection and with a relatively guaranteed and expanding internal market, that the countries just embarking on industrialization would have set a different course and directed their efforts towards hostile and risky external markets.

Thus, in the developing countries which undertook to industrialize at that time, industrialization proceeded piecemeal in a large number of watertight compartments with little inter-communication, to the serious detriment of productivity.

The Second World War gave this form of inward-looking industrialization still further impetus, and nothing happened thereafter to alter this characteristic trend. Industrialization based on import substitution has certainly been of great assistance in raising income in those developing countries, but it has done so to a much lesser extent than would have been the case had there been a rational policy judiciously combining import substitution with industrial exports.

The experience of the countries—especially the Latin American countries—which were thus becoming industrialized in watertight compartments is of particular interest in this connexion, because it illustrates the problems that the other developing countries may have to face if, for lack of external markets, they too are forced to look inwards in their industrial development. The former countries are now confronted with the following consequences of their industrial development:

(a) The simple and relatively easy phase of import substitution has reached, or is reaching, its limit in the countries where industrialization has made most progress. As this happens, the need arises for technically complex and difficult substitution activities, which usually require great capital intensity and very large markets if a reasonable degree of economic viability is to be attained. Thus there are limits to import substitution in the developing countries which cannot be exceeded without a frequent and considerable waste of capital.

Moreover, the extension of import substitution to a wider range of goods generates or increases demand for other imports, whether of raw materials and intermediate goods to manufacture products in respect of which such substitution is taking place, or of new lines of capital goods or consumer goods that technology is constantly creating.

(b) The relative smallness of national markets, in addition to other adverse factors, has often made the cost of industries excessive and necessitated recourse to very high protective tariffs; the latter in turn has had unfavourable effects on the industrial structure because it has encouraged the establishment of small uneconomical plants, weakened the incentive to introduce modern techniques, and slowed down the rise in productivity. Thus a real vicious circle has been created as regards exports of manufactured goods. These exports encounter great difficulties because internal costs are high, and internal costs are high because, among other reasons, the exports which would enlarge the markets are lacking. Had it been possible to develop industrial exports, the process of industrialization would have been more economical, for it would have made possible the international division of labour in manufacturing.

(c) Usually industrialization has not been the result of a programme but has been dictated by adverse external circumstances which made it necessary to restrict or ban imports; these measures have been applied especially to non-essential imports that can be dispensed with or postponed. Thus home production of these goods has been encouraged, absorbing scarce production resources, often regardless of cost. A more rational policy would have given priority to import substitution in respect of goods which could be produced under more favourable conditions than others, not only consumer goods, as has generally been the case, but also raw materials and intermediate and capital goods.

(d) This substitution in respect of non-essential or not urgently needed goods has led those developing countries which are most advanced in the process of industrialization to concentrate, so far as their imports are concerned, on essential goods, particularly those required by productive activities. Hence, any sizable drop in the earnings of primary exports cannot be offset as easily as in former times by compressing imports, because nowadays the margin of such imports that can be eliminated without slowing the pace of internal economic activity and employment is much narrower.

(e) <mark> Finally, excessive protectionism has generally insulated national markets from external competition, weakening and even destroying the incentive necessary for improving the quality of output and lowering costs under the private-enterprise system. It has thus tended to stifle the initiative of enterprises as regards both the internal market and exports.</mark>
*[...good to compare this with Nkrmah...]*

<mark>The development of industrial exports, in addition to counteracting the potential trade gap, will make it possible gradually to increase the advantages of industrialization by correcting its defects. This applies not only to the developing countries which have already started this process and are making headway, but also to the others, especially those which have emerged with the collapse of the colonial system. A process of fragmentation even greater than that which previously existed in the international economy is now taking place. Nearly one hundred of the developing countries have each less than 15 million inhabitants and in two thirds of them the population is less than 5 million; their national markets are handicapped not only by the smallness of their populations but also, in many cases, by their extremely low incomes per capita.

These countries must become industrialized, come what may, for, generally speaking, they do not have sufficient agriculture to provide adequate employment for the increment in the economically active population, particularly when new techniques are introduced which increase productivity and reduce the relative demand for labour.</mark>
*[this bit strongly overlaps with Nkrumah]*

On the other hand, the circumstances in which the great industrial countries now find themselves are very different from those of the 1930's and the post-war period, yet the atmosphere prevailing in those countries has often not encouraged industrial exports from the developing countries. Moreover, the latter, in their turn, usually lack a clear-cut policy for promoting their manufactured goods." pp. 20-23.

### again very important: tariffs on developing exports are bad for developing and developed states alike, because the small sacrifice that developing state exports would bring to developed states, are such that allow the further importation within developing states, of developed state exports — because the entire point of attacking the declining terms of trade is to enable the developing states to afford industrial imports. Holy shit. So this really is about making a more efficient international division of labour, that would help both developing and developed states alike, one that is hindered by protectionism, and colonial history, two things that go against the "Smithian" concept of free markets. So NIEO is saving global capitalism, once and for all, from the terrible market interventions of colonisation, and neo-mercantilism: ###

"2. BARRIERS IN THE INDUSTRIAL CENTRES TO EXPORTS OF MANUFACTURES FROM THE PERIPHERY

The barriers which the industrial countries have placed in the way of exports of manufactures from the developing countries are of long standing and have recently become greater in some cases. Among the foremost of such barriers special mention should be made of differential tariffs. These tariffs seriously hamper the processing of raw materials in the developing countries, because as a rule they rise in proportion to the degree of processing.1

No special attention has been devoted to these differential tariffs in the GATT customs negotiations, although their importance has been recognized in that organization's reports. It is understandable that the tariff cuts granted to each other by the industrial countries which are Contracting Parties of GATT, although extended to the less advanced countries under the most-favoured-nation clause, had no significant effect on them, since the goods to which they applied were usually those of interest to the former countries and not to the latter.

Furthermore, in cases where some developing countries have surmounted the obstacles and, as a result of preferences or relatively low tariffs, have succeeded in securing a foothold for their industrial exports in certain major centres, the latter have imposed restrictions on imports from such countries to prevent a disruption of the market.

This has happened even in cases where there were no balance-of payments or unemployment problems, two of the reasons usually cited to justify import restrictions. The countries of western Europe, in spite of their large trade surplus and manpower shortage, have not been noted for a liberal import policy towards manufactures from developing countries. Thus, in 1962, so far as total manufactures2 imported by the EEC countries are concerned, the proportion imported from all developing countries fluctuated between only 1 and 4 per cent, whereas, the corresponding proportions were 11 per cent for the United States and 12 per cent for the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom imports more manufactures from the developing countries than does the entire European Economic Community, and between 40 and 50 per cent of the cotton textiles it consumes comes from them and Japan.

Unfortunately, both the United States and the United Kingdom have made their policy considerably less liberal by concluding agreements with the developing countries which severely limit the latter's exports of manufactures. For example, under existing arrangements, if exports to the United States and the United Kingdom remain unchanged, it seems unlikely that exports of cotton textiles, which expanded at the rate of 14 per cent from 1955 to 1961, will be able to increase by more than 3 per cent in the next few years.

Apart from cotton textiles, there are also restrictions on jute and tobacco products, preserved fish, coconut fibre articles, sewing-machines and bicycles.

It should be noted that, in addition to import restrictions, limitations are frequently imposed through administrative procedures. Sometimes private enterprises also introduce their own restrictions, either by preventing imports of products manufactured by their subsidiaries or affiliates in the developing countries or in other ways.3

The problems created by some industrial imports from developing countries cannot be disregarded, but neither should they be exaggerated. Unfortunately these imports have covered a small range of products and countries,4 and if the range of both were substantially wider, this diversification would by itself considerably reduce the risk of disrupting the markets of the developing countries.

Moreover, the volume of industrial goods which the developing countries need to export to reach their growth targets is by no means unmanageable. As will be seen below, if half the potential gap were to be covered by such exports by 1970, this would represent only between 4 and 5 per cent of the increment in the advanced private-enterprise countries' consumption of manufactures. These proportions would, of course, be lower still if the more industrially advanced socialist countries are included in the calculations.

Can so tiny a figure possibly be a cause of anxiety? Reference is often made to the sacrifice that exports from the peripheral countries would entail for the industrial countries. <mark>But neither the above figure nor the nature of the process involved can really be described as a sacrifice. For these additional exports from the developing countries would very soon be reflected in further imports from the major centres, particularly of capital and intermediate goods. These are precisely the goods in which the productivity of the industrial centres is very high and which earn very substantial sums. To export such goods in increasing quantities against imports of articles which they manufacture with relatively less efficiency, far from being a sacrifice, would be a positive advantage.</mark>" p. 23-25.

### Regional group based substitution policies, but not autarchic groups, groups that still aim for an international division of labour, so as to not continually lag behind developed world: ### 

"3 . A NEW SUBSTITUTION POLICY WITHIN THE REGIONAL GROUPINGS
 
The stress just laid on industrial exports does not mean that import substitution policy should be abandoned. On the contrary, it should be maintained. In calculating the potential trade gap, it was assumed that the tempo of the substitution process will remain the same as in the past. There is still a margin for import substitution, although it has shrunk considerably in those peripheral countries which have made more headway with industrialization. <mark> The margin could be appreciably widened if substitution were to be carried out, not within each individual country's domestic market, but within groupings of countries so as to reap more easily the benefits of competition, specialization and economies of scale. </mark>
*[Extremely similar to Nkrumah, but for market rather than for planning reasons]*

This more rational form of substitution policy could be applied to imports not only of goods but also of services, such as freight and insurance, which form an important component of the potential gap. Furthermore, in some cases the export of these services might be increased if a collective approach were to be adopted through such groupings. But the difficulties in the way are by no means negligible.

It is sometimes assumed that the formation of such groupings is a valid alternative to the expansion of industrial exports to the developed countries. Import substitution policy, if applied by a large grouping of developing countries, could certainly carry the process further and ensure greater economic viability than at present. But the effectiveness of such a policy has its limitations.

First and foremost, beyond a certain point import substitution becomes increasingly difficult and costly. Several factors account for this: the lack of natural resources; the technical complexity of certain industries; and the inadequate scale of production even in a grouping of developing countries. If even large economic areas, endowed with a wide variety of abundant natural resources and a high level of technical skill, are interested in promoting the international division of labour, they do so because they find the interchange advantageous. Can countries in a less satisfactory economic and technological position possibly deny themselves such advantage even if they group together? In any event, it takes time for these groupings to develop, and, even if they made considerable and effective headway with their substitution policy, they would still have to pass through a period during which it would be extremely convenient for them to export increasing quantities of manufactures in order to supply themselves especially with the capital goods they require to complete and consolidate this development.

Again, the steady advance of technology in the manufacture both of new and more efficient capital goods and of consumer goods adds further advantages to those of trade visualized in purely static terms. Not all the industrial countries keep step so far as modern techniques are concerned and these innovations are not evenly distributed over the vast range of goods. A mounting flow of trade has the merit of quickly disseminating the goods that incorporate these new techniques. If the developing countries were to closet themselves within their own groupings, they would be lagging behind continually in the march of technological progress, since their primary exports would not earn them nearly enough to purchase such goods. It is inconceivable that, in the foreseeable future, they will have access to the innovations in question or be able to incorporate them in their own production if they are compelled to restrict their imports of capital goods in this way.

Lastly, within a regional grouping, particularly if it is very limited in scope, there is a risk that its smaller members may become too dependent on their larger associates; perhaps the best way to prevent this is through the diversification of their export trade in respect of both products and countries of destination. And this can only be achieved at the world trade level.

All these points explain why the developing countries' have displayed great interest in expanding their trade with the more advanced countries. Actually the problem of narrowing and closing the potential gap must be attacked simultaneously on both fronts. Their interdependence is obvious. <mark>The expansion of industrial exports to the rest of the world will undoubtedly have beneficial effects on trade between countries of the same region. In turn, if regional exports of manufacture are thus increased, the industries concerned will be in a better position to compete with the rest of the world.</mark>" pp. 25-26.



### Likes RULES BASED ORDER, likes GATT, but critical of it mainly having benefited developed states ###
"1. THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF GATT
GATT has important achievements to its credit. <mark>Following the interwar period of chaos, it introduced a new concept of a rule of law in world trade.</mark> One may criticize the particular character of some of the law that has been applied. But this should not be allowed to obscure the fact that the decision of Governments that world trade should be subject to this law was in itself of vital importance in this field.

In the past, increases in trade restrictions by particular countries have frequently led to a spiral of retaliation in which all have lost and none have gained. The application of a rule of law in world trade has already helped to limit excesses of this type and could do much more if the law itself were made more responsive to contemporary needs.

A second virtue of GATT is its machinery for complaint and consultation. Each member country has an opportunity to bring forward instances in which it feels that it has suffered injury at the hands of another member, and can claim the redress authorized or adequate compensation, although it must be admitted that this procedure has often not been effective in practice.

GATT also provides a forum in which countries can discuss the impact of one another's trade policies, with a view to reaching a satisfactory accommodation.

Within this framework of rules and consultative machinery, GATT has brought about considerable reductions in the tariffs and other restrictions on world trade that were established during the difficult period following the great depression.

<mark> It is true, however, that these reductions have been of benefit mainly to the industrial countries and that the developing countries generally have obtained very little direct benefit from this process.</mark> But in so far as the reduction of tariffs and restrictions may have created a more favourable basis for growth in the industrial countries, some indirect benefit will have accrued to the developing countries in the form of a higher demand for their exports than would otherwise have occurred.

Finally, since the publication of the report, Trends in International Trade, in October 1958, GATT has been making a serious effort to conduct its activities in a way that would take more adequate account of the unsatisfactory position of developing countries in world trade. Still, it must be admitted that the positive results of these efforts, after more than five years, have been somewhat disappointing. But the problem itself has been recognized, and this recognition led to the consideration of a Programme of Action by a GATT Meeting of Ministers in May 1963, and subsequently to efforts to implement that Programme. The matter now rests with Governments: if this Programme of Action could be fully carried out by all countries concerned, a very important step forward would have been taken. The resolutions relating to the Kennedy round were also adopted at this Meeting of Ministers. The principle of not demanding full reciprocity from the developing countries was accepted, among others, during these negotiations on tariffs and other barriers to trade. In addition, the achievement of satisfactory conditions of access to world markets for agricultural products was set as an objective.

The GATT Tariff Conference of 1960/61 resulted in very limited benefits for the less developed countries; it is to be hoped that the Kennedy round will produce a more favourable balance in view of its significance as crucial evidence of the practical benefits which GATT can offer to the developing countries.

Furthermore, it is acknowledged that GATT has a very efficient secretariat, a fact that is borne out by its studies and the careful preparation of its negotiations; and it has also shown its ability to adapt itself to the changing realities of the times.

The above comments on GATT should be approached within a broad perspective. We can now see clearly things which were still confused and vague in the Havana days. The absolute necessity of industrialization for the peripheral countries had not been recognized or realized nor had the need to intensify this process as advanced techniques permeated into agriculture. Another thing which was not properly understood was the persistent trend towards external imbalance, which was attributed more to the inflationary policy of Governments than to the nature of the growth phenomenon. In addition, the developing countries were still very far from stating their position and defining their aspirations and attitudes. The end of the colonial era was only just in sight. And social tensions in the developing countries were not then so conspicuous or so pressing as they now are. We can now see all this clearly and there is an increasingly strong feeling that a very great effort will have to be made to alleviate and eliminate those tensions, which have such a great impact on world peace.

This effort could no longer take the form of a few rules and principles specifying what must be avoided; it is essential also to determine what must be done and to formulate a policy which meets this need for positive action.

<mark> Why has GATT not been as efficacious for the developing countries as for the industrial countries? There are two main reasons. First, the Havana Charter, as has already been said, is based on the classic concept that the free play of international economic forces by itself leads to the optimum expansion of trade and the most efficient utilization of the world's productive resources; rules and principles are therefore established to guarantee this free play. Secondly, the rules and principles in question have not always been strictly complied with and, even though they seem to have been observed in the letter in certain instances, the spirit underlying them has not been respected.</mark>" pp. 27-29.
*[... this is key ...]*



### Very important: problem with previous way of viewing international trade was that it was (in my paraphrase) ahistorical, and therefore did not consider the structural differences between developed and developing states. From this, Prebisch argues that the concept of reciprocity must be reimagined, and stressess that fixing the declining terms of trade is what is needed to restore balance, and so allow comparative advantage, that is, a rational international division of labour, that will actually help the developed and the developing states. That is, it is not an attack on economic efficiency, but an attack on the assumption that efficiency will sort itself out not matter what the historical context. ###

2. THE STRUCTURAL DIFFERENCES AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES

<mark> The free play concept is admissible in relations between countries that are structurally similar, but not between those whose structures are altogether different as are those of the industrially advanced and the developing countries. These structural differences show themselves in various ways which were outlined in the preceding section.</mark>

The structural origin of the deterioration in the terms of trade has already been indicated and there is no need to revert to the subject here. It will be recalled that the Havana Charter mentions this phenomenon at one point. Elsewhere, however, in the articles relating to commodity agreements, the predominant idea that ultimately emerges is that basic market trends should not be impeded.

We have also commented on the disparities in international demand, which also derive from structural differences. This is a fundamental point which does not seem to have been given the importance it deserves in the Havana Charter. Thus, in seeking to lower or eliminate tariffs and restrictions with a view to promoting trade, neither the Charter nor the Agreement draws any distinction between developed and developing countries. And since there is an initial assumption of homogeneity, such reductions have to be equivalent everywhere. This is the principle of conventional reciprocity that prevailed until recently. The fact that these disparities place primary and industrial exporting countries in diametrically opposite positions has not been taken into consideration. Hence the importance of the fact that the need to depart from the idea of conventional reciprocity was recognized in the Kennedy round.

The former group of countries, given the relatively slow growth of their primary exports, cannot cope with the intensive demand for industrial imports unless they alter the composition of the imports in question, replacing some of them by domestic production so as to be able to increase others. In the absence of an export trade in manufactured goods, the only alternative left open to the developing countries is to grow at the slow tempo set by their primary exports, or to encourage these substitution activities by means of protectionism so as to develop more rapidly and prevent or correct the external imbalance as they develop.

<mark>If protectionism is kept within certain bounds, i.e., if it is applied only to the extent necessary to counteract the disparity in demand, there is no reason why it should have a depressive effect on the dynamics of world trade; on the contrary, it should have a purely balancing influence. Within these limits, not only is industrialization compatible with the development of primary production and exports, but an optimum relation between the two, conducive to intensive economic development, is conceivable. Of course, if a developing country weakens its primary export position by measures which act as disincentives and its place is not filled by other exporting countries, these depressive effects on international trade will be inevitable. But such effects, however we may look at them, are not inherent in the industrialization of the peripheral countries.</mark>

### this view of protectionism aimed at restoring balance to the terms of trade, is contrasted with the protectionism used by developing states which accentuates these problems, and is therefore a genuine attack on market efficiency, and a rational international division of labour: ###
<mark>On the other hand, protectionism in respect of primary production in the countries exporting manufactured goods does exert a depressive influence, since the disparity in demand, instead of being levelled out, is accentuated, to the obvious detriment of world trade and the growth of the developing countries. In this form, protectionism helps in these centres to slow down still further the growth of the developing countries' primary exports, and hence the expansion of imports of the manufactures needed for their development. In other words, protectionism in respect of primary production in the industrial countries has definitely unfavourable repercussions on international trade and compels the peripheral countries to adopt further import substitution measures so they can continue their development; thus it makes this development even more difficult by curtailing their opportunities for an advantageous international division of labour. The Havana Charter fails to recognize this lack of symmetry and its practical implications for trade policy.</mark>

Given the prevailing conception, the objective pursued when that Charter was drawn up could be summed up in the following simple terms. The restrictions and tariffs which had been doing so much to distintegrate the world economy had to be gradually removed and the free play of international economic forces thus restored. The reduction and elimination of restrictions and tariffs would also cover the primary commodities imported by the industrial countries, and, in return, the countries exporting these primary commodities would have to lower their import tariffs on manufactured goods.

Herein lies the concept of the symmetry of a situation that was far from symmetrical: if the peripheral countries wished to reap the benefits of á liberal tariff policy for primary imports in the industrial centres, they likewise had to make equivalent concessions in their own tariffs. <mark>This is the serious drawback of such a conception of trade policy: the failure to take into account the fact that those equivalent concessions would intensify the trend towards trade imbalance inherent in the disparity of international demand, instead of helping to correct it.</mark>

Great strides have been made of late towards recognizing that these rules of reciprocity in trade negotiations must be changed because of the economic inequality between countries. A clear distinction must be made, however, between this conventional reciprocity and real reciprocity.

This is a very important point which must be borne in mind. The request for reciprocity in negotiations between countries which have not structural disparity in their demand is logical. Indeed, it is essential for the stability of the world economy that any expansion of exports which a given country achieves on the basis of concessions from the others should be accompanied by concessions granted to the latter, so that its imports from them can increase.

In the case of trade between the developing and the industrial countries, the situation is different. Since the former tend to import more than they export—owing to the international disparity in demand—concessions granted by the industrial countries tend to rectify this disparity and are soon reflected in an expansion of their exports to the developing countries. In other words, the developing economies, given their great potential demand for imports, can import more than they would otherwise have been able to do had those concessions not been granted. Thus there is a real or implicit reciprocity, independent of the play of conventional concessions. And this is what must be recognized in international trade policy.

### this protectionism is not intended to be permanent ###
<mark>"This distinction is inherent at the transitional stage through which the developing countries are passing.</mark> The disparity in world demand does not have to be a permanent phenomenon. As the structure of production gradually changes with industrialization and industrial exports, this disparity will tend to disappear. Indeed, as such exports, both to advanced and to other developing countries, make headway, the disparity can be levelled out gradually. When this happens—and only then—will the bases have been laid for conventional reciprocity between the industrialized countries and countries that are pressing on along the road of industrialization. But this is a long process for most of the developing countries." pp. 29-31.
### <ins>*THIS IS PERHAPS THE MOST ESSENTIAL QUOTE*</ins> ###


### Commodity agreements must not only regulate price fluctuations:### 
"The effort to conclude commodity agreements can hardly succeed so long as such agreements are regarded simply as a compromise between the interests of exporting and importing countries and if they are based mainly on the idea of dealing with market fluctuations. Apart from the understandable interest in having lower prices for the commodities they import, there are at least two aspects to be taken into account by the importing countries. The first involves recognition of the fact that, as the export incomes of the developing countries fall because of the drop in prices, their demand for exports from the industrial countries also declines. The second aspect to be taken into account is the unfavourable impact of low commodity prices upon the growth of the developing countries and hence upon the general outlook for political and economic well-being throughout the world." p. 56.



### internal or external focused industrialisation? ###
"<mark>From all these considerations it is clear that the promotion of industrial exports from the developing countries is not just a matter of steering existing industries outwards. Undoubtedly, those industries which in the course of time, could become competitive on the international market should be assisted. However, at the same time, it is advisable to concentrate on the new industries or the new lines of production in existing industries which, with some support in the local market, or preferably in the wider market constituted by a grouping of developing countries, could be launched in the search for external markets.</mark>

Furthermore, this situation could not remain static. For, as the technological density of each developing country increases and as its ability to compete abroad improves, new export lines of manufactures will come to the fore encouraged by the dynamism of demand for a series of products. It must not be forgotten that the objective is to lessen the technological disparity between the developing countries and the industrial centres, even though this cannot be done rapidly given the latter's pace of advance." p. 60.


"However, before we go any further, a certain confusion should be dispelled. The significance of industrial imports from the developing countries must be clearly explained. The idea has been spread that the low wages prevailing in the developing countries will enable them to flood the markets of the industrial countries and seriously threaten their level of living. The fact is that wages are low in the developing countries but productivity is also low; and even in cases where wages are lower than productivity, the total cost per unit of output is usually high, either because of the shortage of capital or because of the lack of external economies which are such important factors in the cost of industrial products.

On the other hand, even though the cost of some of the developing countries' exports is relatively low, it should be borne in mind that they give rise to remunerative trade. If such countries propose to increase these industrial exports, they do so because they need to import more capital good and other manufactures from the advanced countries. And if the latter limit their imports from the developing countries, they will lower the level of activity of their more efficient industries in which technological density and capital intensity generate higher incomes, i.e., the more productive industries.

It would clearly pay the industrial countries to shift productive factors from those industries where they can buy more cheaply abroad to those in which  their high level of technology really counts. Undue concentration upon the short-term difficulties that may be involved for particular domestic industries in the industrially developed countries may obscure the elementary fact that, in the longer run, it pays a country to buy as cheaply as possible. In this sense the availability of certain low-cost goods from developing countries offers opportunities for new types of mutually advantageous specialization and exchange." p. 61

### how to stimulate exports (infant industry thesis) ###
"In order to stimulate exports of industrial products from developing countries, two types of measures are required. In the first place, channels to the markets of the great industrial centers should be opened through the elimination of obstacles to the flow of exports. Secondly, the active promotion of exports should be undertaken both in the developing countries themselves and on the international plane. 

The existing obstacles to exports have just been examined. But it is necessary to go further and introduce a system of preferences.

The case for preferential treatment for exports of developing countries is that it would help the industries of developing countries to overcome the difficulties that they encounter in export markets because of their high initial costs. It is a <mark>temporary measure</mark> which, by opening up larger markets to the industries of developing countries, would enable them to lower their costs and thus compete on world markets without the need for continuing preference. 

<mark>The case is thus a logical extension of the infant industry argument.</mark>

<mark>It is not a matter of controversy among economists that national protection of infant industries is justifiable wherever such industries have a long-run prospect of reaching a high level of efficiency.</mark>

<mark>In order to be efficient, those industries must have access to wider markets; otherwise they may not be able to break out of the vicious circle of low output and high costs. Such markets must be sought in the developed countries as well as in other developing countries. But if infant industries need protection in the domestic market because of high costs, they obviously need even more protection in foreign markets, whether developed or developing, in the form of preferential treatment. It is for this reason that the following two suggestions have been made: (a) developing countries should give preference to imports from other developing countries in their own markets; (b) developed countries should give preference to imports from developing countries in their own markets.</mark>" pp. 65-66.

### important ### 
"<mark>The introduction of a new system of preferences would involve the mutual adjustment of various conflicting interests among the developing countries on the one hand, and between the developing and the industrial countries, on the other.</mark>" pp. 66-67.

### who should benefit from preferences? ### 
"The problem is, perhaps, not too important from the standpoint of the industrial countries, because imports of manufactures from the developing countries are not likely to be a matter of overwhelming consequence for them in any case, as we have seen. But they are for some developing countries which may fear that they will not be bale to benefit from preferences if they have to compete with other more advanced members of the developing group. The problem of which developing countries should be included in the scheme is thus closely linked to the problem of gradation or differentiation of preferences which will be examined below." p. 67. 

### what should developing countries do however? ###
"It is clear that the development of an export trade in manufactures from developing countries depends primarily upon the efforts of these countries  themselves. No guarantee of access to world markets nor even the granting of preferential treatment could replace measures taken in the developing countries to stimulate industries capable of production for export. There are many obstacles to the expansion of manufactures in the developing countries.

First and foremost, it is necessary to induce export-mindedness. For reasons that have already been explained, their industrialization has been based almost exclusively on import substitution. There is no conflict between import susbstitution and export promotion. Industries that begin by catering to the domestic market may, as they gain experience and efficiency, branch out into export markets. On the whole, however, import substitution has gone furthest in the light industries, and this is precisely the area where demand is least buoyant in the developed countries, and where the sensitivity to low-cost imports is therefore greatest. Without in any way giving up the hope that the developed countries will be prepared to progressively increase access to their markets for the products of light industries, the developing countries should also seek out the many opportunities that exist in areas of more dynamic demand. 

Recent experience strongly suggests that the competitive advantage of developing countries does not lie solely in the textile and other similar industries. There is significant evidence that the developing countries may also have an advantage in, for example, certain of the metal-transforming industries.

There is also a case for exploring, much more systematically than hitherto, the possibilities of manufacturing certain types of intermediate goods and components in the developing countries for use in the industries of developed countries. It is already the practice of large-scale industry in the advanced countries to subcontract certain of their operations to specialized firms, and it is possible that subcontracting of this type may prove feasible on an international as well as a national scale. The advantage of such manufacturing operations for the developing countries is that export sales would be closely linked with the production process of industries in the developed countries, and no elaborate efforts of marketing or merchandising would therefore be required. Such subcontracting would, moreover, emphasize a complementary relationship between industries of developed and developing countries rather than competition. There should be further study of possibilities along these lines, including an examination of methods of avoiding excessive dependence on external factors or an unduly specialized industrial structure such as might result from industrial development of this type.

Much more could be done, moreover, to overcome the difficulties that result from the lack of familiarity of industrialists in developing countries with the needs and quality standards of developed countries. At the national level, Governments may undertake their own investigations of foreign market possibilities, introduce inspection and quality-control programmes to export industries, and foster better design through institutes and research centres. 

Governments may also be in a position to share certain of the risks involved in breaking into new markets abroad. For example, Governments might well underwrite production and export feasibility studies. 

Even in the advanced countries, Governments have assumed a major responsibility in the provision of information to the business community based on their contacts overseas. Governments should also consider offering various types of risk insurance and even undertake to indemnify exporters for losses incurred during an initial period of market exploration or penetration. Provision is also required, particularly for durable goods industries, for export credit facilities that would enable producers in developing countries to compete with the credit terms available to exporters in the developed countries. A variety of fiscal and other incentives could also be provided. The granting of tax advantages, special treatment in the allocation of import licenses or export bonuses, favourable transport rates and many other incentives could help to promote the achievement of adequate export goals. Experience along these lines in the industrially developed countries should be studied with a view to drawing the necessary lessons for developing countries. In addition to these incentives, the developing countries should eliminate certain obstacles which result from their own policies. We have referred elsewhere to monetary overvaluation of a structural nature. But there is another kind of overvaluation which is the result of a process of suppressed inflation: internal costs rise while the exchange rate is artificially maintained. In some developing countries, this has seriously discouraged exports and at the same time stimulated imports, thus aggravating the tendency towards a trade deficit. There is often also a series of administrative obstacles hindering exports. All this should therefore be revised. 

All the measures discussed so far involve action primarily at the national level. The effectiveness of such action would, however, be greatly reinforced if supplemented by international financial and technical assistance. For example, studies of market opportunities suitable to the industrial potential of developing countries could be undertaken on a larger scale and more thoroughly if international resources and expertise were made available. Similarly, much more credit and insurance facilities could be made available to exporters if international sources of finance could be brought into play. In this connexion, the pilot programme of the <mark>Inter-American Development Bank in providing export credit facilities to Latin American industries constitutes a significant beginning.</mark>
*[interesting as also cited by Nkrumah]*

Careful study is also needed if the proposal made by the delegation of Brazil to GATT for the establishment of an international trade centre to supply information on market potentialities in the developed countries for goods produced in the developing countries.3

There is also scope for private foreign capital to play an invaluable role in promoting exports of manufactures from developing countries. Private foreign investment in the manufacturing sector in developing countries generally brings with it the most up-to-date technical developments as well as a sound knowledge of the markets to be served. Experience in recent years suggests that, for a variety of reasons, foreign capital is likely to be most effective as well as most acceptable in developing countries if it is combined with local capital and initiative. It would also be important for the developing countries to require, in suitable cases, that adequate export goals be achieved by industries established with foreign capital resources. <mark>Where international companies establish subsidiaries in developing countries, they frequently concentrate on import substitution in local markets,  avoiding exports which would compete with the output of their home-based plants.</mark> Governments of developing countries should study the possibility of making the co-operation of private foreign capital conditional upon adequate export performance, and certainly any special incentives provided to private foreign capital should be linked to such performance.

In general, there is still much to be learnt and studied in the field of export promotion, and the time available for preparing the present Conference has not been sufficient for this purpose. The co-operation of the United Nations Centre for Industrial Development should be sought in pressing forward the necessary investigation in this field." pp. 75-78.

# C. THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES #
'The obstacles in the way of this effort are formidable. In many developing countries, however, attention is often centred on the external obstacles; the problems seem more urgent there, perhaps because they are more conspicuous. But it would be dangerous self-deception to imagine that, once these external obstacles are overcome, the way will be wide open for spontaneous economic development. 

On the contrary, the determination to overcome these obstacles and exert a conscious and deliberate influence on the forces of economic and social development is also essential. The policy of international co-operation is only complementary; it cannot be a substitute for internal development policy. Nor can the internal policy fulfil its aims without effective and timely international co-operation.' p. 113.

'1. THE INTERNAL CHANGES REQUIRED BY DEVELOPMENT 
Generally speaking, there are three main obstacles in the way of propagating technological advances and which therefore obstruct the growth of productivity and per capita income in the developing countries: land tenure; limited social mobility and the ignorance of the masses; and the concentration of income in the hands of relatively small population groups. 

The forms of land tenure generally to be found in the developing countries are plainly incompatible with technological progress. This is particularly so, when a large part of the productive land is concentrated in the hands of a few, while a very large number of small and medium-sized holdings generally make up a tiny proportion of the cultivable land. All this conspires to frustrate development; in some cases, because the high rent already received by the landowner makes him reluctant to take the trouble of introducing modern techniques, and, in others, because the very size of the holdings and the shortage of resources for investment are often such that contemporary techniques cannot be fully and properly used. 

The ignorance of the masses and limited social mobility are two aspects of the same problem. If up-to-date techniques are to penetrate, there must be opportunities for learning and training and easy access to such opportunities. Conditions must also be favourable for the most able and dynamic people at all social levels to come forward and get ahead. Generally speaking, this happens to a very limited extent only, which means that a vast human potential is wasted, just as the outdated forms of land tenure impede exploitation of the enormous productive potential of the land. 

The concentration of income is, of course, linked to these other two features and, in many cases, is aggravated by the serious effects of inflation, a phenomenon usually also influenced by structural factors. It might be thought that this concentration would actively contribute to capital formation, but this is so only in exceptional cases. More commonly, high incorrles mean superfluous and excessive consumption by the groups that have them, to the detriment of the investment that techno- logical progress requires on an ever-growing scale. 

<mark>It would be a serious mistake, however, to imagine that the problem of capital formation could be fundamentally solved in most developing countries, if this savings potential of the high-income groups could be used for investment rather than consumption, and if, at the same time, the flight of capital, which reaches rather significant figures in several developing countries, could be avoided. There is no doubt that all this must be done and that the tax instrument should be used together with other measures for the purpose. But in many countries the problem of capital formation has also to be tackled resolutely with international financial resources, which, by stimulating the rapid growth of income, help to create opportunities for domestic capital formation that are now extremely slight.</mark> 

The weakness of the development impetus in many of the peripheral countries is a result of all these internal factors that combine in a particular social structure, in addition to the external factors that hamper growth. Development calls for changes in the forms of production and in the economic structure which cannot come about unless a change in the social structure leaves the way open to the forces of technological progress. 

Without such changes industrialization cannot run its full course. Generally speaking, industrialization has simply superimposed itself on the existing state of affairs without basically altering it. Furthermore, the excessive protectionism frequently sheltering industries adds a further privilege to those already existing in the distribution of income. 

Again, industrial development is constricted not only by the lack of exports but also by the smallness of the internal market. Rural masses working generally in a very unproductive way, urban masses who, to a large extent, take refuge in very low-paid artisan occupations and per- sonal services, or who waste their efforts in antiquated forms of trading —these do not provide a large and lively market for the products of industrial development. And industry itself does not generate, to the extent desired, the income that could create its own strong market; for excessive protectionism and restrictions on imports usually shield it from healthy competition and weaken the incentive to raise productivity and the incomes of the people who work in it through the efficient use of men and machines.' pp. 113-114.
