<div class="delete">

<h1>Preface to Second Edition</h1>
<p class="NoIndent">The demand for a second edition of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> faced the author with a difficult decision. A work on international politics completed in the summer of 1939, however rigorously it eschewed prophecy, necessarily bore marks of its time in substance, in phraseology, in its use of tenses and, above all, in such phrases as ‘the War’, ‘post-War’ and so forth, which can no longer be related without a strong effort on the part of the reader to the war of 1914–18. When, however, I approached the task of revision, it soon became clear that if I sought to rewrite every passage which had been in some way affected by the subsequent march of events, I should be producing not a second edition of an old book but essentially a new one; and this would have been a clumsy and unprofitable attempt to force new wine into old bottles. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> remains a study of the period between the two wars written as that period was coming to an end and must be treated on its merits as such. What I have done, therefore, is to recast phrases which would be misleading or difficult to readers now far remote in time from the original context, to modify a few sentences which have invited misunderstanding, and to remove two or three passages relating to current controversies which have been eclipsed or put in a different perspective by the lapse of time.</p>
<p class="para">On the other hand, I have changed nothing of substance, and have not sought to modify expressions of opinion merely on the ground that I should not unreservedly endorse them to-day. Perhaps, therefore, I may be permitted to indicate here the two main respects in which I am conscious of having since departed to some degree from the outlook reflected in these pages.</p>
<p class="para">In the first place, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was written with the deliberate aim of counteracting the glaring and dangerous defect of nearly all thinking, both academic and popular, about international politics in English-speaking countries from 1919 to 1939 – the almost total neglect of the factor of power. To-day this defect, though it sometimes recurs when items of a future settlement are under discussion, has been to a considerable extent overcome; and some passages of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> state their argument with a rather one-sided emphasis which no longer seems as necessary or appropriate to-day as it did in 1939.</p>
<p class="para">Secondly, the main body of the book too readily and too complacently accepts the existing nation-state, large or small, as the unit of international society, though the final chapter offers some reflexions, to which subsequent events have added point, on the size of the political and economic units of the future. The conclusion now seems to impose itself on any unbiased observer that the small independent nation-state is obsolete or obsolescent and that no workable international organisation can be built on a membership of a multiplicity of nation-states. My present views on this point have been worked out in a small book recently published under the title <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span>, and I can therefore with the better conscience take the only practicable course and leave the present work substantially as it was completed in 1939.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="paraRight">E. H. C<span class="smallCap">ARR</span></p>
<p class="NoIndet">15 <span class="italic">November</span> 1945</p>

<br class="end-page"/></div>