<div class="delete">

<h1>Preface to First Edition</h1>
<p class="NoIndent">This book, which was originally planned in 1937, was sent to the press in the middle of July 1939 and had reached page proof when war broke out on 3 September 1939. To introduce into the text a few verbal modifications hastily made in the light of that event would have served little purpose; and I have accordingly preferred to leave it exactly as it was written at a time when war was already casting its shadow on the world, but when all hope of averting it was not yet lost. Wherever, therefore, such phrases as ‘the war’, ‘pre-war’ or ‘post-war’ occur in the following pages, the reader will understand that the reference is to the War of 1914–18.</p>
<p class="para">When the passions of war are aroused, it becomes almost fatally easy to attribute the catastrophe solely to the ambitions and the arrogance of a small group of men, and to seek no further explanation. Yet even while war is raging, there may be some practical importance in an attempt to analyse the underlying and significant, rather than the immediate and personal, causes of the disaster. If and when peace returns to the world, the lessons of the breakdown which has involved Europe in a second major war within twenty years and two months of the Versailles Treaty will need to be earnestly pondered. A settlement which, having destroyed the National Socialist rulers of Germany, leaves untouched the conditions which made the phenomenon of National Socialism possible, will run the risk of being as short-lived and as tragic as the settlement of 1919. No period of history will better repay study by the peacemakers of the future than <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> which fills the interval between the two Great Wars. The next Peace Conference, if it is not to repeat the fiasco of the last, will have to concern itself with issues more fundamental than the drawing of frontiers. In this belief, I have ventured to dedicate this book to the makers of the coming peace.</p>
<p class="para">The published sources from which I have derived help and inspiration are legion. I am specially indebted to two books which, though not specifically concerned with international relations, seem to me to have illuminated some of the fundamental problems of politics: Dr Karl Mannheim’s <span class="italic">Ideology and Utopia</span> and Dr Reinhold Niebuhr’s <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society</span>. Mr Peter Drucker’s <span class="italic">The End of Economic Man</span>, which did not come into my hands until my manuscript was virtually complete, contains some brilliant guesses and a most stimulating and suggestive diagnosis of the present crisis in world history. Many excellent historical and descriptive works about various aspects of international relations have appeared in the last twenty years, and my indebtedness to some of these is recorded in endnotes, which must take the place of a bibliography. But not one of these works known to me has attempted to analyse the profounder causes of the contemporary international crisis.</p>
<p class="para">My obligations to individuals are still more extensive. In particular, I desire to record my deep gratitude to three friends who found time to read the whole of my manuscript, whose comments were equally stimulating whether they agreed or disagreed with my views, and whose suggestions are responsible for a great part of such value as this book possesses: Charles Manning, Professor of International Relations in the London School of Economics and Political Science; Dennis Routh, Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and recently Lecturer in International Politics in the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth; and a third, whose official position deprives me of the pleasure of naming him here. During the past three years I have been a member of a Study Group of the Royal Institute of International Affairs engaged on an enquiry into the problem of nationalism, the results of which are about to be published.<a class="sup" href="#preface-fn1" id="preface_fn1">1</a> The lines of investigation pursued by this Group have sometimes touched or crossed those which I have been following in these pages; and my colleagues in this Group and other contributors to its work have, in the course of our long discussions, unwittingly made numerous valuable contributions to the present book. To these, and to the many others who, in one way or another, consciously or unconsciously, have given me assistance and encouragement in the preparation of this volume, I tender my sincere thanks.</p>
<p class="paraRight">E. H. C<span class="smallCap">ARR</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">30 <span class="italic">September</span> 1939</p>
<h1> </h1>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#preface_fn1" id="preface-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Nationalism:</span> A study by a Group of Members of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Oxford University Press).</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>