<div class="delete">

<h1><a id="page_25"></a>CHAPTER THREE</h1>
<h2>The Utopian Background</h2>
<h3 id="ch03-head1">The foundations of utopianism</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">The modern school of utopian political thought must be traced back to the break-up of the mediaeval system, which presupposed a universal ethic and a universal political system based on divine authority. The realists of the Renaissance made the first determined onslaught on the primacy of ethics and propounded a view of politics which made ethics an instrument of politics, the authority of the state being thus substituted for the authority of the church as the arbiter of morality. The answer of the utopian school to this challenge was not an easy one. An ethical standard was required which would be independent of any external authority, ecclesiastical or civil; and the solution was found in the doctrine of a secular ‘law of nature’ whose ultimate source was the individual human reason. Natural law, as first propounded by the Greeks, had been an intuition of the human heart about what is morally right. ‘It is eternal’, said Sophocles’ Antigone, ‘and no man knows whence it came.’ The Stoics and the mediaeval schoolmen identified natural law with reason; and in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries this identification was revived in a new and special form. In science, the laws of nature were deduced by a process of reasoning from observed facts about the nature of matter. By an easy analogy, the Newtonian principles were now applied to the ethical problems. The moral law of nature could be scientifically established; and rational deduction from the supposed facts of human nature took the place of revelation or intuition as the source of morality. Reason could determine what were the universally valid moral laws; and the assumption was made that, once these laws were determined, human beings would conform to them just as matter conformed to the physical laws of nature. Enlightenment was the royal road to the millennium.</p>
<p class="para">By the eighteenth century, the main lines of modern utopian thought were firmly established. It was essentially individualist in that it made the human conscience the final court of appeal in moral questions; in France it became associated with a secular, in England with an evangelical tradition. It was essentially rationalist in that it identified the human <a id="page_26"></a>conscience with the voice of reason.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn1" id="ch03_fn1">1</a> But it had still to undergo important developments; and it was Jeremy Bentham who, when the industrial revolution had transferred the leadership of thought from France to England, gave to nineteenth-century utopianism its characteristic shape. Starting from the postulate that the fundamental characteristic of human nature is to seek pleasure and avoid pain, Bentham deduced from this postulate a rational ethic which defined the good in the famous formula ‘the greatest happiness of the greatest number’. As has often been pointed out, ‘the greatest happiness of the greatest number’ performed the function, which natural law had performed for a previous generation, of an absolute ethical standard. Bentham firmly believed in this absolute standard, and rejected as ‘anarchical’ the view that there are ‘as many standards of right and wrong as there are men’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn2" id="ch03_fn2">2</a> In effect, ‘the greatest happiness of the greatest number’ was the nineteenth-century definition of the content of natural law.</p>
<p class="para">The importance of Bentham’s contribution was twofold. In the first place, by identifying the good with happiness, he provided a plausible confirmation of the ‘scientific’ assumption of the eighteenth-century rationalists that man would infallibly conform to the moral law of nature once its content had been rationally determined. Secondly, while preserving the rationalist and individualist aspect of the doctrine, he succeeded in giving it a broader basis. The doctrine of reason in its eighteenth-century guise was pre-eminently intellectual and aristocratic. Its political corollary was an enlightened despotism of philosophers, who alone could be expected to have the necessary reasoning power to discover the good. But now that happiness was the criterion, the one thing needful was that the individual should understand where his happiness lay. Not only was the good ascertainable – as the eighteenth century had held – by a rational process, but this process – added the nineteenth century – was not a matter of abstruse philosophical speculation, but of simple common sense. Bentham was the first thinker to elaborate the doctrine of salvation by public opinion. The members of the community ‘may, in their aggregate capacity, be considered as constituting a sort of judicatory or tribunal – call it…<span class="italic">The Public-Opinion Tribunal</span>’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn3" id="ch03_fn3">3</a> It was James Mill, Bentham’s pupil, who produced the most complete argument yet framed for the infallibility of public opinion:</p>
<p class="extract">Every man possessed of reason is accustomed to weigh evidence and to be guided and determined by its preponderance. When various conclusions are, with their evidence, presented with equal care and with equal skill, there is a moral certainty, though some few may be misguided, that the greatest number will judge right, and that the <a id="page_27"></a>greatest force of evidence, whatever it is, will produce the greatest impression.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn4" id="ch03_fn4">4</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">This is not the only argument by which democracy as a political institution can be defended. But this argument was, in fact, explicitly or implicitly accepted by most nineteenth-century liberals. The belief that public opinion can be relied on to judge rightly on any question rationally presented to it, combined with the assumption that it will act in accordance with this right judgement, is an essential foundation of the liberal creed. In Great Britain, the later eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries were pre-eminently the age of popular preaching and of political oratory. By the voice of reason men could be persuaded both to save their own immortal souls and to move along the path of political enlightenment and progress. The optimism of the nineteenth century was based on the triple conviction that the pursuit of the good was a matter of right reasoning, that the spread of knowledge would soon make it possible for everyone to reason rightly on this important subject, and that anyone who reasoned rightly on it would necessarily act rightly.</p>
<p class="para">The application of these principles to international affairs followed, in the main, the same pattern. The Abbe’ Saint-Pierre, who propounded one of the earliest schemes for a League of Nations, ‘was so confident in the reasonableness of his projects that he always believed that, if they were fairly considered, the ruling powers could not fail to adopt them’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn5" id="ch03_fn5">5</a> Both Rousseau and Kant argued that, since wars were waged by princes in their own interest and not in that of their peoples, there would be no wars under a republican form of government. In this sense, they anticipated the view that public opinion, if allowed to make itself effective, would suffice to prevent war. In the nineteenth century, this view won widespread approval in Western Europe, and took on the specifically rationalist colour proper to the doctrine that the holding of the right moral beliefs and the performance of the right actions can be assured by process of reasoning. Never was there an age which so unreservedly proclaimed the supremacy of the intellect. ‘It is intellectual evolution’, averred Comte, ‘which essentially determines the main course of social phenomena.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn6" id="ch03_fn6">6</a> Buckle, whose famous <span class="italic">History of Civilisation</span> was published between 1857 and 1861, boldly declared that dislike of war is ‘a cultivated taste peculiar to an intellectual people’. He chose a cogent example, based on the assumption, natural to a British thinker, of the ingrained bellicosity of Great Britain’s most recent enemy. ‘Russia is a warlike country’, he wrote, ‘not because the inhabitants are immoral, but because they are unintellectual. The fault is in the head, not in the heart.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn7" id="ch03_fn7">7</a> The view that the spread of education would lead to international peace was shared by many of Buckle’s contemporaries and successors. Its last serious <a id="page_28"></a>exponent was Sir Norman Angell, who sought, by <span class="italic">The Great Illusion</span> and other books, to convince the world that war never brought profit to anyone. If he could establish this point by irrefutable argument, thought Sir Norman, then war could not occur. War was simply a ‘failure of understanding’. Once the head was purged of the illusion that war was profitable, the heart could look after itself. ‘The world of the Crusades and of heretic burning’, ran the opening manifesto of a monthly journal called <span class="italic">War and Peace</span> which started publication in October 1913, ‘… was not a badly-meaning, but a badly-thinking world…We emerged from it by correcting a defect in understanding; we shall emerge from the world of political warfare or armed peace in the same way.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn8" id="ch03_fn8">8</a> Reason could demonstrate the absurdity of the international anarchy; and with increasing knowledge, enough people would be rationally convinced of its absurdity to put an end to it.</p>
<h3 id="ch03-head2">Benthamism transplanted</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">Before the end of the nineteenth century, serious doubts had been thrown from more than one quarter on the assumptions of Benthamite rationalism. The belief in the sufficiency of reason to promote right conduct was challenged by psychologists. The identification of virtue with enlightened self-interest began to shock philosophers. The belief in the infallibility of public opinion had been attractive on the hypothesis of the earlier utilitarians that public opinion was the opinion of educated and enlightened men. It was less attractive, at any rate to those who thought themselves educated and enlightened, now that public opinion was the opinion of the masses; and as early as 1859, in his essay <span class="italic">On Liberty</span>, J. S. Mill had been preoccupied with the dangers of ‘the tyranny of the majority’. After 1900, it would have been difficult to find, either in Great Britain or in any other European country, any serious political thinker who accepted the Benthamite assumptions without qualification. Yet, by one of the ironies of history, these half-discarded nineteenth-century assumptions reappeared, in the second and third decades of the twentieth century, in the special field of international politics, and there became the foundation-stones of a new utopian edifice. The explanation may be in part that, after 1914, men’s minds naturally fumbled their way back, in search of a new utopia, to those apparently firm foundations of nineteenth-century peace and security. But a more decisive factor was the influence of the United States, still in the heyday of Victorian prosperity and of Victorian belief in the comfortable Benthamite creed. Just as Bentham, a century earlier, had taken the eighteenth-century doctrine of reason and refashioned it to the needs of the coming age, so now Woodrow Wilson, the impassioned admirer of <a id="page_29"></a>Bright and Gladstone, transplanted the nineteenth-century rationalist faith to the almost virgin soil of international politics and, bringing it back with him to Europe, gave it a new lease of life. Nearly all popular theories of international politics between the two world wars were reflexions, seen in an American mirror, of nineteenth-century liberal thought.</p>
<p class="para">In a limited number of countries, nineteenth-century liberal democracy had been a brilliant success. It was a success because its presuppositions coincided with the stage of development reached by the countries concerned. Out of the mass of current speculation, the leading spirits of the age took precisely that body of theory which corresponded to their needs, consciously and unconsciously fitting their practice to it, and it to their practice. Utilitarianism and <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> served, and in turn directed, the course of industrial and commercial expansion. But the view that nineteenth-century liberal democracy was based, not on a balance of forces peculiar to the economic development of the period and the countries concerned, but on certain a <span class="italic">priori</span> rational principles which had only to be applied in other contexts to produce similar results, was essentially utopian; and it was this view which, under Wilson’s inspiration, dominated the world after the first world war. When the theories of liberal democracy were transplanted, by a purely intellectual process, to a period and to countries whose stage of development and whose practical needs were utterly different from those of Western Europe in the nineteenth century, sterility and disillusionment were the inevitable sequel. Rationalism can create a utopia, but cannot make it real. The liberal democracies scattered throughout the world by the peace settlement of 1919 were the product of abstract theory, stuck no roots in the soil, and quickly shrivelled away.</p>
<h3 id="ch03-head3">Rationalism and the League of Nations</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">The most important of all the institutions affected by this one-sided intellectualism of international politics was the League of Nations, which was an attempt ‘to apply the principles of Lockeian liberalism to the building of a machinery of international order’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn9" id="ch03_fn9">9</a> ‘The Covenant’, observed General Smuts, ‘… simply carries into world affairs that outlook of a liberal democratic society which is one of the great achievements of our human advance.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn10" id="ch03_fn10">10</a> But this transplantation of democratic rationalism from the national to the international sphere was full of unforeseen difficulties. The empiricist treats the concrete case on its individual merits. The rationalist refers it to an abstract general principle. Any social order implies a large measure of standardization, and therefore of abstraction; there cannot be a different rule for every member of the community. Such standardization is <a id="page_30"></a>comparatively easy in a community of several million anonymous individuals conforming more or less closely to recognized types. But it presents infinite complications when applied to sixty known states differing widely in size, in power, and in political, economic and cultural development. The League of Nations, being the first large-scale attempt to standardize international political problems on a rational basis, was particularly liable to these embarrassments.</p>
<p class="para">The founders of the League, some of whom were men of political experience and political understanding, had indeed recognized the dangers of abstract perfection. ‘Acceptance of the political facts of the present’, remarked the official British Commentary on the Covenant issued in 1919, ‘has been one of the principles on which the Commission has worked’,<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn11" id="ch03_fn11">11</a> and this attempt to take account of political realities distinguished the Covenant not only from previous paper schemes of world organization, but also from such purely utopian projects as the International Police Force, the Kellogg-Briand Pact and the United States of Europe. The Covenant possessed the virtue of several theoretical imperfections. Purporting to treat all members as equal, it assured to the Great Powers a permanent majority on the Council of the League.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn12" id="ch03_fn12">12</a> It did not purport to prohibit war altogether, but only to limit the occasions on which it might legitimately be resorted to. The obligation imposed on members of the League to apply sanctions to the Covenant-breaker was not free from vagueness; and this vagueness had been discreetly enhanced by a set of ‘interpretative’ resolutions passed by the Assembly of 1921. The starkness of the territorial guarantee provided by Article 10 of the Covenant was smoothed away in a resolution which secured an almost unanimous vote at the Assembly of 1923. It seemed for the moment as if the League might reach a working compromise between utopia and reality and become an effective instrument of international politics.</p>
<p class="para">Unhappily, the most influential European politicians neglected the League during its critical formative years. Abstract rationalism gained the upper hand, and from about 1922 onwards the current at Geneva set strongly in the utopian direction.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn13" id="ch03_fn13">13</a> It came to be believed, in the words of an acute critic, ‘that there can exist, either at Geneva or in foreign offices, a sort of carefully classified card-index of events or, better still, “situations”, and that, when the event happens or the situation presents itself, a member of the Council or Foreign Minister can easily recognize that event or situation and turn up the index to be directed to the files where the appropriate action is prescribed’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn14" id="ch03_fn14">14</a> There were determined efforts to perfect the machinery, to standardize the procedure, to close the ‘gaps’ in the Covenant by an absolute veto on all war, and to make the application of sanctions ‘automatic’. The Draft Treaty of Mutual Assistance, the <a id="page_31"></a>Geneva Protocol, the General Act, the plan to incorporate the Kellogg-Briand Pact in the Covenant and ‘the definition of the aggressor’, were all milestones on the dangerous path of rationalization. The fact that the utopian dishes prepared during these years at Geneva proved unpalatable to most of the principal governments concerned was a symptom of the growing divorce between theory and practice.</p>
<p class="para">Even the language current in League circles betrayed the growing eagerness to avoid the concrete in favour of the abstract generalizations. When it was desired to arrange that the Draft Treaty of Mutual Assistance could be brought into force in Europe without waiting for the rest of the world, a stipulation was inserted that it might come into force ‘by continents’ – a proviso with farcical implications for every continent except Europe. A conventional phraseology came into use, which served as the current coin of delegates at Geneva and of League enthusiasts elsewhere and which, through constant repetition, soon lost all contact with reality. ‘I cannot recall any time,’ said Mr Churchill in 1932, ‘when the gap between the kind of words which statesmen used and what was actually happening in many countries was so great as it is now.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn15" id="ch03_fn15">15</a> The Franco-Soviet Pact, which was a defensive alliance against Germany, was so drafted as to make it appear an instrument of general application, and was described as a shining example of the principle of ‘collective security’. A member of the House of Commons, when asked in the debate on sanctions in June 1936 whether he would run the risk of war with Italy, replied that he was prepared to face ‘all the consequences naturally flowing from the enforcement of the Covenant against an aggressor nation’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn16" id="ch03_fn16">16</a> These linguistic contortions encouraged the frequent failure to distinguish between the world of abstract reason and the world of political reality. ‘Metaphysicians, like savages,’ remarks Mr Bertrand Russell, ‘are apt to imagine a magical connexion between words and things’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn17" id="ch03_fn17">17</a> The metaphysicians of Geneva found it difficult to believe that an accumulation of ingenious texts prohibiting war was not a barrier against war itself. ‘Our purpose’, said M. Benes in introducing the Geneva Protocol to the 1924 Assembly, ‘was to make war impossible, to kill it, to annihilate it. To do this we had to create a system.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn18" id="ch03_fn18">18</a> The Protocol was the ‘system’. Such presumption could only provoke nemesis. Once it came to be believed in League circles that salvation could be found in a perfect card-index, and that the unruly flow of international politics could be canalized into a set of logically impregnable abstract formulae inspired by the doctrines of nineteenth-century liberal democracy, the end of the League as an effective political instrument was in sight.</p>
<h3 id="ch03-head4"><a id="page_32"></a>The apotheosis of public opinion</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">Nor did any better fortune attend the attempt to transplant to the international sphere the liberal democratic faith in public opinion. And here there was a double fallacy. The nineteenth-century belief in public opinion comprised two articles: first (and in democracies this was, with some reservations, true), that public opinion is bound in the long run to prevail; and second (this was the Benthamite view), that public opinion is always right. Both these beliefs, not always clearly distinguished one from the other, were uncritically reproduced in the sphere of international politics.</p>
<p class="para">The first attempts to invoke public opinion as a force in the international world had been made in the United States. In 1909, President Taft evolved a plan for the conclusion of treaties between the United States and other Great Powers for the compulsory arbitration of international disputes. But how, it was asked, would the award of the arbitral court be enforced? Taft disposed of the question with complete light-heartedness. He had never observed that in a democracy like the United States the enforcement of awards gave rise to any particular difficulty; and he professed himself ‘very little concerned’ about this aspect of the matter. ‘After we have gotten the cases into court and decided, and the judgments embodied in a solemn declaration of a court thus established, few nations will care to face the condemnation of international public opinion and disobey the judgment.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn19" id="ch03_fn19">19</a> Public opinion, as in democratic countries, was bound to prevail; and public opinion, as the Benthamites said, could always be trusted to come down on the right side. The United States Senate rejected the President’s proposal, so that the opportunity did not occur to put ‘international public opinion’ to the test. Four years later, Bryan, Wilson’s first Secretary of State, came forward with a further set of treaties. In the Bryan treaties, arbitration was dropped in favour of conciliation. Their most novel and significant feature was the provision that the parties to them should not resort to war until twelve months had elapsed from the beginning of the dispute. In hot blood, the Bryan treaties seemed to admit, men might not listen to the voice of reason. But once delay had cooled their passions, reason, in the guise of international public opinion, would resume her compelling force. Several such treaties were in fact signed between the United States and other Powers – some of them, by a curious irony, in the first days of the first world war. ‘The sum and substance’ of these treaties, said Wilson in October 1914, was ‘that whenever any trouble arises the light shall shine on it for a year before anything is done; and my prediction is that after the light has shone on it for a year, it will not be necessary to do anything; that after we know what happened, then we will know who was right and who was wrong.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn20" id="ch03_fn20">20</a></p>
<p class="para"><a id="page_33"></a>The belief in the compelling power of reason, expressed through the voice of the people, was particularly congenial to Wilson. When he entered politics in 1910 as a candidate for the Governorship of New Jersey, his campaign was based on an appeal to ‘the people’ against the political bosses; and he displayed ‘an almost mystical faith that the people would follow him if he could speak to enough of them’. The result of his campaign confirmed him in his belief in the potency of the voice of reason speaking through his lips. He would govern by the persuasiveness of reason acting on an all-powerful public opinion. ‘If the bosses held back, he had only to appeal to the people.…The people wanted the high things, the right things, the true things.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn21" id="ch03_fn21">21</a></p>
<p class="para">America’s entry into the war entailed no modification of Wilson’s faith in the rightness of popular judgement. He took up the cue in one of the speeches in which he discussed the future conditions of peace:</p>
<p class="extract">It is the peculiarity of this great war that, while statesmen have seemed to cast about for definitions of their purpose and have sometimes seemed to shift their ground and their point of view, the thought of the mass of men, whom statesmen are supposed to instruct and lead, has grown more and more unclouded, more and more certain of what it is they are fighting for. National purposes have fallen more and more into the background; and the common purpose of enlightened mankind has taken their place. The counsels of plain men have become on all hands more simple and straightforward and more unified than the counsels of sophisticated men of affairs, who still retain the impression that they are playing a game of power and are playing for high stakes. That is why I have said that this is a people’s war, not a statesmen’s. Statesmen must follow the clarified common thought or be broken.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn22" id="ch03_fn22">22</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">‘Unless the Conference was prepared to follow the opinions of mankind,’ he said on his way to Paris, ‘and to express the will of the people rather than that of the leaders of the Conference, we should be involved in another break-up of the world.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn23" id="ch03_fn23">23</a></p>
<p class="para">Such conceptions did, in fact, play a conspicuous part in the work of the Conference. When the Italian Delegates proved recalcitrant in their claims to Fiume and the Adriatic coast, Wilson remained convinced that if he could appeal against the ‘leaders’ to the ‘people’, if only (as at the New Jersey election) he ‘could speak to enough of them’, the voice of reason must infallibly prevail. The communiqué to the Italian people, and the withdrawal of the Italian Delegation from Paris, were the result of this conviction. The problem of disarmament was approached in the same spirit. Once the enemy Powers had been disarmed by force, the voice of <a id="page_34"></a>reason, speaking through public opinion, could be trusted to disarm the Allies. Both Wilson and Mr Lloyd George ‘felt that, if the German army was limited, France would have to follow suit, and that she could hardly maintain an immense army under those conditions’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn24" id="ch03_fn24">24</a> And if anyone had paused to enquire on what compulsion France would have to disarm, the only answer could have been an appeal to the rational force of public opinion. Most important of all, the whole conception of the League of Nations was from the first closely bound up with the twin belief that public opinion was bound to prevail and that public opinion was the voice of reason. If ‘open covenants openly arrived at’ could be made the rule, the plain people could be relied on to see that the contents conformed to the requirements of that reason which was the highest morality. The new order must be based, not on ‘covenants of selfishness and compromise’ between governments, but on ‘the thought of the plain people here and everywhere throughout the world, the people who enjoy no privilege and have very simple and unsophisticated standards of right and wrong’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn25" id="ch03_fn25">25</a> It must be ‘sustained by the organized opinion of mankind’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn26" id="ch03_fn26">26</a></p>
<p class="para">The ticklish problem of material sanctions was approached reluctantly from the American, and almost as reluctantly from the British, side. Like Taft, Anglo-Saxon opinion felt itself ‘very little concerned’ over this aspect of the matter; for the recognition of the necessity of sanctions was in itself a derogation from the utopian doctrine of the efficacy of rational public opinion. It was unthinkable that a unanimous verdict of the League should be defied; and even if by some mischance the verdict were not unanimous, ‘a majority report would probably be issued, and…this’, suggested Lord Cecil during the debates in Paris, ‘would be likely to carry great weight with the public opinion of the world’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn27" id="ch03_fn27">27</a> The official British Commentary on the Covenant developed the same point of view:</p>
<p class="extract">The League [it declared] must continue to depend on the free consent, in the last resort, of its component States; this assumption is evident in nearly every article of the Covenant, of which the ultimate and most effective sanction must be the public opinion of the civilized world. If the nations of the future are in the main selfish, grasping and warlike, no instrument or machinery will restrain them. It is only possible to establish an organization which may make peaceful co-operation easy and hence customary, and to trust in the influence of custom to mould public opinion.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The sanctions provisions were slurred over, half apologetically and with a consolatory postscript:</p>
<p class="extract"><a id="page_35"></a>Not the least important part of the pressure will be supplied by the publicity stipulated for in the procedure of settlement. The obscure issues from which international quarrels arise will be dragged out into the light of day and the creation of an informed public opinion made possible.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn28" id="ch03_fn28">28</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">When the House of Commons debated the ratification of the Versailles Treaty, Lord Cecil was the principal expositor of the League Covenant:</p>
<p class="extract">For the most part [he told the House] there is no attempt to rely on anything like a superstate; no attempt to rely upon force to carry out a decision of the Council or the Assembly of the League. That is almost impracticable as things stand now. What we rely upon is public opinion…and if we are wrong about it, then the whole thing is wrong.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn29" id="ch03_fn29">29</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Addressing the Imperial Conference of 1923 on the subject of the League, Lord Cecil explained that ‘its method is not…the method of coercive government: it is a method of consent and its executive instrument is not force, but public opinion’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn30" id="ch03_fn30">30</a> And when the first League Assembly met, Lord Cecil, as British Delegate, propounded the same philosophy from the tribune:</p>
<p class="extract">It is quite true that by far the most powerful weapon at the command of the League of Nations is not the economic or the military weapon or any other weapon of material force. By far the strongest weapon we have is the weapon of public opinion.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn31" id="ch03_fn31">31</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Even the more sceptical and sophisticated Balfour, explaining the absence of sanctions from the Washington agreements of 1921, declared that ‘if any nation hereafter deliberately separates itself from the collective action we have taken in Washington in this year of grace, it will stand condemned before the world’;<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn32" id="ch03_fn32">32</a> and it was one of the presuppositions of liberal democracy that such condemnation would be effective. But the argument that public opinion is the all-important weapon is two-edged; and in 1932, during the Manchurian crisis, the ingenious Sir John Simon used it to demonstrate that any other kind of action was superfluous. ‘The truth is’, he told the House of Commons, ‘that when public opinion, world opinion, is sufficiently unanimous to pronounce a firm moral condemnation, sanctions are not needed.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn33" id="ch03_fn33">33</a> Given the Benthamite and Wilsonian premises, this answer was irrefutable. If public opinion had failed to curb Japan, then – as Lord Cecil had said in 1919 – ‘the whole thing is wrong’.</p>
<p class="para"><a id="page_36"></a>The nemesis of utopianism in international politics came rather suddenly. In September 1930, the President of Columbia University, Dr Nicholas Murray Butler, ventured on the ‘reasonably safe prediction that the next generation will see a constantly increasing respect for Cobden’s principles and point of view and a steadily growing endeavour more largely to give them practical effect in public policy’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn34" id="ch03_fn34">34</a> On 10 September 1931, Lord Cecil told the Assembly of the League of Nations that ‘there has scarcely ever been a period in the world’s history when war seems less likely than it does at present’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn35" id="ch03_fn35">35</a> On 18 September 1931, Japan opened her campaign in Manchuria; and in the following month, the last important country which had continued to adhere to the principle of free trade took the first steps towards the introduction of a general tariff.</p>
<p class="para">From this point onwards, a rapid succession of events forced upon all serious thinkers a reconsideration of premises which were becoming more and more flagrantly divorced from reality. The Manchurian crisis had demonstrated that the ‘condemnation of international public opinion’, invoked by Taft and by so many after him, was a broken reed. In the United States, this conclusion was drawn with extreme reluctance. In 1932, an American Secretary of State still cautiously maintained that ‘the sanction of public opinion can be made one of the most potent sanctions of the world’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn36" id="ch03_fn36">36</a> In September 1938, President Roosevelt based his intervention in the Czecho-Slovak crisis on the belief of the United States Government in ‘the moral force of public opinion’,<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn37" id="ch03_fn37">37</a> and in April 1939, Mr Cordell Hull once again announced the conviction that ‘a public opinion, the most potent of all forces for peace, is more strongly developing throughout the world’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn38" id="ch03_fn38">38</a> But in countries more directly menaced by international crisis, this consoling view no longer found many adherents; and the continued addition to it of American statesmen was regarded as an index of American unwillingness to resort to more potent weapons. Already in 1932, Mr Churchill taunted the League of Nations Union with ‘long-suffering and inexhaustible gullibility’ for continuing to preach this out-worn creed.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn39" id="ch03_fn39">39</a> Before long the group of intellectuals who had once stressed the relative unimportance of the ‘material’ weapons of the League began to insist loudly on economic and military sanctions as the necessary cornerstones of an international order. When Germany annexed Austria, Lord Cecil indignantly enquired whether the Prime Minister ‘holds that the use of material force is impracticable and that the League should cease to attempt “sanctions” and confine its efforts to moral force’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn40" id="ch03_fn40">40</a> The answer might well have been that, if Neville Chamberlain did in fact hold this view, he could have learned it from Lord Cecil’s own earlier utterances.</p>
<p class="para"><a id="page_37"></a>Moreover, scepticism attacked not only the premise that public opinion is certain to prevail, but also the premise that public opinion is certain to be right. At the Peace Conference, it had been observed that statesmen were sometimes more reasonable and moderate in their demands than the public opinion which they were supposed to represent. Even Wilson himself once used – no doubt, in perfect sincerity – an argument which directly contradicted his customary thesis that reason can be made to prevail by appealing to ‘the plain people everywhere throughout the world’. In the League of Nations Commission of the Conference, the Japanese had raised the issue of race equality. ‘How can you treat on its merits in this quiet room’, enquired the President, ‘a question which will not be treated on its merits when it gets out of this room?’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn41" id="ch03_fn41">41</a> Later history provided many examples of this phenomenon. It became a commonplace for statesmen at Geneva and elsewhere to explain that they themselves had every desire to be reasonable, but that public opinion in their countries was inexorable; and though this plea was sometimes a pretext or a tactical manœuvῡre, there was often a solid substratum of reality beneath it. The prestige of public opinion correspondingly declined. ‘It does not help the conciliator, the arbitrator, the policeman or the judge’, wrote a well-known supporter of the League of Nations Union recently, ‘to be surrounded by a crowd emitting either angry or exulting cheers.’<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn42" id="ch03_fn42">42</a> Woodrow Wilson’s ‘plain men throughout the world’, the spokesmen of ‘the common purpose of enlightened mankind’, had somehow transformed themselves into a disorderly mob emitting incoherent and unhelpful noises. It seemed undeniable that, in international affairs, public opinion was almost as often wrong-headed as it was impotent. But where so many of the presuppositions of 1919 were crumbling, the intellectual leaders of the utopian school stuck to their guns; and in Great Britain and the United States – and to a lesser degree in France – the rift between theory and practice assumed alarming dimensions. Armchair students of international affairs were unanimous about the kind of policy which ought to be followed, both in the political and in the economic field. Governments of many countries acted in a sense precisely contrary to this advice, and received the endorsement of public opinion at the polls.</p>
<h3 id="ch03-head5">The problem of diagnosis</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">In such disasters the obvious explanation is never far to seek. The able historian of the Communist International has noted that, in the history of that institution, ‘every failure – not objective failure, but the failure of the reality to comply with the utopia – supposes a traitor’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn43" id="ch03_fn43">43</a> The principle has a wide application, and touches deep springs of human character. Statesmen <a id="page_38"></a>of more than one country have been pilloried by disappointed utopians as wreckers of the international order. The few members of the school who have tried to go behind this simple anthropomorphic explanation hesitate between two alternative diagnoses. If mankind in its international relations has signally failed to achieve the rational good, it must either have been too stupid to understand that good, or too wicked to pursue it. Professor Zimmern leans to the hypothesis of stupidity, repeating almost word for word the argument of Buckle and Sir Norman Angell:</p>
<p class="extract">The obstacle in our path…is not in the moral sphere, but in the intellectual…It is not because men are ill-disposed that they cannot be educated into a world social consciousness. It is because they – let us be honest and say ‘we’ – are beings of conservative temper and limited intelligence.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The attempt to build a world order has failed not through ‘pride or ambition or greed’, but through ‘muddled thinking’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn44" id="ch03_fn44">44</a> Professor Toynbee, on the other hand, sees the cause of the breakdown in human wickedness. In a single volume of the annual <span class="italic">Survey of International Affairs</span>, he accuses Italy of ‘positive, strong-willed, aggressive egotism’, Great Britain and France of ‘negative, weak-willed, cowardly egotism’, Western Christendom as a whole of a ‘sordid’ crime, and all the members of the League of Nations, except Abyssinia, of ‘covetousness’ or ‘cowardice’ (the choice is left to them), while the attitude of the Americans is merely ‘rather captious and perverse’.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn45" id="ch03_fn45">45</a> Some writers combined the charge of stupidity and the charge of wickedness. Much comment on international affairs was rendered tedious and sterile by incessant girding at a reality which refused to conform to utopian prescriptions.</p>
<p class="para">The simplicity of these explanations seemed almost ludicrously disproportionate to the intensity and complexity of the international crisis.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn46" id="ch03_fn46">46</a> The impression made on the ordinary man was more accurately recorded in April 1938 in some words of Mr Anthony Eden:</p>
<p class="extract">It is utterly futile to imagine that we are involved in a European crisis which may pass as it has come. We are involved in a crisis of humanity all the world over. We are living in one of those great periods of history which are awe-inspiring in their responsibilities and in their consequences. Stupendous forces are loose, hurricane forces.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn47" id="ch03_fn47">47</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">It is not true, as Professor Toynbee believes, that we have been living in an exceptionally wicked age. It is not true, as Professor Zimmern implies, that we have been living in an exceptionally stupid one. Still less is it true, as <a id="page_39"></a>Professor Lauterpacht more optimistically suggests, that what we have been experiencing is ‘a transient period of retrogression’ which should not be allowed unduly to colour our thought.<a class="sup" href="#ch03-fn48" id="ch03_fn48">48</a> It is a meaningless evasion to pretend that we have witnessed, not the failure of the League of Nations, but only the failure of those who refused to make it work. The breakdown of the nineteen-thirties was too overwhelming to be explained merely in terms of individual action or inaction. Its downfall involved the bankruptcy of the postulates on which it was based. The foundations of nineteenth-century belief are themselves under suspicion. It may be not that men stupidly or wickedly failed to apply right principles, but that the principles themselves were false or inapplicable. It may turn out to be untrue that if men reason rightly about international politics they will also act rightly, or that right reasoning about one’s own or one’s nation’s interests is the road to an international paradise. If the assumptions of nineteenth-century liberalism are in fact untenable, it need not surprise us that the utopia of the international theorists made so little impression on reality. But if they are untenable today, we shall also have to explain why they found such widespread acceptance, and inspired such splendid achievements, in the nineteenth century.</p>
<h3 id="ch03-head6">Notes</h3>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn1" id="ch03-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">While this is the form of utopianism which has been predominant for the past three centuries, and which still prevails (though perhaps with diminishing force) in English-speaking countries, it would be rash to assert that individualism and rationalism are necessary attributes to utopian thought. Fascism contained elements of a utopianism which was anti-individualist and irrational. These qualities were already latent in the utopian aspects of Leninism – and perhaps even of Marxism.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn2" id="ch03-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bentham, <span class="italic">Works</span>, ed. Bowring, i. p. 31.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn3" id="ch03-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bentham, <span class="italic">Works</span>, ed. Bowring, viii. p. 561.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn4" id="ch03-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">James Mill, <span class="italic">The Liberty of the Press</span>, pp. 22–3.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn5" id="ch03-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. S. Bury, <span class="italic">The Idea of Progress</span>, p. 131.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn6" id="ch03-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Comte, <span class="italic">Cours de Philosophie Positive</span>, Lecture LXI.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn7" id="ch03-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Buckle, <span class="italic">History of Civilisation</span> (World’s Classics ed.), i. pp. 151–2.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn8" id="ch03-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in Angell, <span class="italic">Foundations of International Polity</span>, p. 224. Internal evidence suggests that the passage was written by Sir Norman Angell himself.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn9" id="ch03-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. H. S. Crossman in J. P. Mayer, <span class="italic">Political Thought</span>, p. 202.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn10" id="ch03-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">New Year’s Eve broadcast from Radio-Nations, Geneva: <span class="italic">The Times</span>, 1 January 1938.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn11" id="ch03-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Covenant of the League of Nations and a Commentary Thereon</span>, Cmd 151 (1919), p. 12. ‘The great strength of the Covenant’, said the British Government some years later, ‘lies in the measure of discretion which it allows to the Council and Assembly in dealing with future contingencies which may have no parallel in history and which therefore cannot all of them be foreseen in advance’ (<span class="italic">League of Nations: Official Journal</span>, May 1928, p. 703).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_40"></a><a href="#ch03_fn12" id="ch03-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The defection of the United States upset this balance, and left four major confronted with four minor Powers. Subsequent increases in membership, which have taken place at frequent intervals since 1923, gave a permanent preponderance to the minor Powers. The Council, in becoming more ‘representative’, lost much of its effectiveness as a political instrument. Reality was sacrificed to an abstract principle. It should be added that the prudent Swiss Delegate foresaw this result when the first increase was mooted in 1922 (<span class="italic">League of Nations: Third Assembly</span>, First Committee, pp. 37–8).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn13" id="ch03-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">By a curious irony, this development was strongly encouraged by a group of American intellectuals; and some European enthusiasts imagined that, by following this course, they would propitiate American opinion. The rift between the theory of the intellectuals and the practice of the government, which developed in Great Britain from 1932 onwards, began in the United States in 1919.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn14" id="ch03-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. Fischer-Williams, <span class="italic">Some Aspects of the Covenant of the League of Nations</span>, p. 238.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn15" id="ch03-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Winston Churchill, <span class="italic">Arms and the Covenant</span>, p. 43.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn16" id="ch03-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in Toynbee, <span class="italic">Survey of International Affairs</span>, 1935, ii, p. 448.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn17" id="ch03-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. Russell in <span class="italic">Atlantic Monthly</span>, clix. (February 1937), p. 155.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn18" id="ch03-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Fifth Assembly</span>, p. 497.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn19" id="ch03-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">W. Taft, <span class="italic">The United States and Peace</span>, p. 150.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn20" id="ch03-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Public Papers of Woodrow Wilson: The New Democracy</span>, ed. R. S. Baker, i. p. 206.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn21" id="ch03-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. S. Baker, <span class="italic">Woodrow Wilson: Life and Letters</span>, iii. p. 173.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn22" id="ch03-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Public Papers of Woodrow Wilson: War and Peace</span>, ed. R. S. Baker, i. p. 259.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn23" id="ch03-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Intimate Papers of Colonel House</span>, ed. C. Seymour, iv. p. 291.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn24" id="ch03-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">D. Lloyd George, <span class="italic">The Truth about the Treaties</span>, i. p. 187.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn25" id="ch03-fn25">25.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Public Papers of Woodrow Wilson: War and Peace</span>, ed. R. S. Baker, i. p. 133.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn26" id="ch03-fn26">26.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Ibid</span>., i. p. 234.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn27" id="ch03-fn27">27.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Miller, <span class="italic">The Drafting of the Covenant</span>, ii. p. 64.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn28" id="ch03-fn28">28.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Covenant of the League of Nations with a Commentary Thereon</span>, Cmd 151, pp. 12, 16.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn29" id="ch03-fn29">29.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 21 July 1919: <span class="italic">Official Report</span>, cols. 990, 992.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn30" id="ch03-fn30">30.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Imperial Conference of 1923</span>, Cmd 1987, p. 44.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn31" id="ch03-fn31">31.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: First Assembly</span>, p. 395.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn32" id="ch03-fn32">32.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in Zimmern, <span class="italic">The League of Nations and the Rule of Law</span>, p. 399.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn33" id="ch03-fn33">33.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 22 March 1932: <span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. 923.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn34" id="ch03-fn34">34.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">N. M. Butler, <span class="italic">The Path to Peace</span>, p. xii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn35" id="ch03-fn35">35.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Twelfth Assembly</span>, p. 59.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn36" id="ch03-fn36">36.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Mr Stimson to the Council of Foreign Relations on 8 August 1932 (<span class="italic">New York Times</span>, 9 August 1932).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn37" id="ch03-fn37">37.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Believing, as this government does, in the moral force of public opinion…’ (Sumner Welles in <span class="italic">State Department Press Releases</span>, 8 October 1938, p. 237).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn38" id="ch03-fn38">38.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 18 April 1939.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_41"></a><a href="#ch03_fn39" id="ch03-fn39">39.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Winston Churchill, <span class="italic">Arms and the Covenant</span>, p. 36.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn40" id="ch03-fn40">40.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Daily Telegraph</span>, 24 March 1938.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn41" id="ch03-fn41">41.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Miller, <span class="italic">The Drafting of the Covenant</span>, ii. p. 701.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn42" id="ch03-fn42">42.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lord Allen of Hurtwood, <span class="italic">The Times</span>, 30 May 1938.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn43" id="ch03-fn43">43.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">F. Borkenau, <span class="italic">The Communist International</span>, p. 179.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn44" id="ch03-fn44">44.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Neutrality and Collective Security</span> (Harris Foundation Lectures: Chicago, 1936), pp. 8, 18.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn45" id="ch03-fn45">45.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Survey of International Affairs</span>, 1935, ii. pp. 2, 89, 96, 219–20, 480.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn46" id="ch03-fn46">46.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">As a recent writer has said of the French eighteenth-century rationalists, ‘their superficiality lay in a shocking exaggeration of the simplicity of the problem’ (Sabine, <span class="italic">A History of Political Theory</span>, p. 551).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn47" id="ch03-fn47">47.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Anthony Eden, <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, p. 275.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch03_fn48" id="ch03-fn48">48.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, xvii. (September-October 1938), p. 712.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>