<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="chapter" id="ch11">
<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_168"/>CHAPTER ELEVEN</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">The Sanctity of Treaties</p>
<p class="NoIndent">One of the functions of law necessary to civilized life is to protect rights which have been created by private contracts concluded in a manner recognized by the law as valid. International law upholds, with some reservations, rights created by international treaties and agreements. This principle is essential to the existence of any kind of international community and is, as we have seen, recognized in theory by all states. The fact that the only written obligations of states are those contained in treaties, and that customary international law is limited in scope and sometimes uncertain in content, has given to treaties a more prominent place in international law than is occupied by contracts in municipal law. Indeed the contents of treaties are sometimes misleadingly spoken of as if they were a part of international law itself, though nobody would regard the provisions of a contract between Smith and Robinson as a part of municipal law. The principle of the sanctity of treaties has thus been thrown into undue relief, which was further intensified by the controversy over the peace treaties of 1919–20. Between the two wars writers, especially those from countries interested in the maintenance of the peace settlement, attempted to treat the rule <span class="italic">pacta sunt servanda</span> not merely as a fundamental rule of international law, but as the cornerstone of international society – an attitude mockingly described by a German writer as ‘<span class="italic">pacta-sunt-servanda-ism</span>’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn1" id="ch11_fn1">1</a> The issue has become one of the most contentious in the whole field of international politics; and confusion has often been caused by failure to distinguish between ‘the sanctity of treaties’ as a rule of international law and ‘the sanctity of treaties’ as a principle of international ethics.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch11-head1">The legal and moral validity of treaties</p>
<p class="NoIndent">In spite of the universal recognition by all countries that treaties are in principle legally binding, international law before 1914 was reluctant to treat as absolute the binding character of treaty obligations. Account had to be taken of the fact that, while states interested in maintenance of the <span class="italic">status quo</span> vigorously asserted the unconditional validity of treaties in <a id="page_169"/>international law, a state whose interests were adversely affected by a treaty commonly repudiated it as soon as it could do so with impunity. France in 1848 announced that ‘the treaties of 1815 are no longer valid in the eyes of the French Republic’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn2" id="ch11_fn2">2</a> Russia in 1871 repudiated the Straits Convention placing restrictions on the passage of her warships which had been imposed on her at the conclusion of the Crimean War. These were merely the most conspicuous of several similar nineteenth-century occurrences. To meet such conditions, international lawyers evolved the doctrine that a so-called <span class="italic">clausula rebus sic stantibus</span> was implicit in every treaty, i.e. that the obligations of a treaty were binding in international law so long as the conditions prevailing at the time of the conclusion of the treaty continued, and no longer. This doctrine, if carried to its logical conclusion, would appear to lead to the position that a treaty had no authority other than the power relationship of the parties to it, and that when this relationship alters the treaty lapses. This position was not infrequently adopted. ‘Every treaty’, wrote Bismarck in a famous phrase, ‘has the significance only of a constatation of a definite position in European affairs. The reserve <span class="italic">rebus sic stantibus</span> is always silently understood.’<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn3" id="ch11_fn3">3</a> The same effect is produced by the doctrine occasionally propounded that a state enjoys the unconditional right to denounce any treaty at any time. This view was stated in its most uncompromising form by Theodore Roosevelt: ‘The nation has as a matter of course a right to abrogate a treaty in a solemn and official manner for what she regards as a sufficient cause, just exactly as she has a right to declare war or exercise another power for a sufficient cause.’<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn4" id="ch11_fn4">4</a> Woodrow Wilson observed in private conversation during the Peace Conference that, when he was a teacher of international law, he had always supposed that a state had the power to denounce any treaty by which it was bound at any time.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn5" id="ch11_fn5">5</a> In 1915, a distinguished neutral international lawyer of the ‘naturalist’ school wrote of the rule <span class="italic">pacta sunt servanda</span> that ‘nobody regards it as a rule of law which is valid without exception either within or without the state’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn6" id="ch11_fn6">6</a></p>
<p class="para">Even Great Britain which, as the strongest Power in the world, had most interest in upholding the validity of treaties, was manifestly disinclined to accept the view that treaty obligations were unconditionally binding. The most famous example is that of the Belgian Guarantee Treaty of 1839, under which the principal European Powers, including Great Britain, bound themselves jointly and severally to resist any violation of the neutrality of Belgium by one of their number. In 1870 Gladstone told the House of Commons, in a passage which was cited with approval by Grey in his speech of 3 August 1914, that he was ‘not able to subscribe to the doctrine of those who have held in this House what plainly amounts to an assertion that the simple fact of the existence of the guarantee is binding <a id="page_170"/>on every party of it, irrespective altogether of the particular position in which it may find itself at the time that the occasion for acting on the guarantee arises’. Such an interpretation Gladstone thought ‘rigid’ and ‘impracticable’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn7" id="ch11_fn7">7</a> A confidential minute written in 1908 by Lord Hardinge, then Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, was conceived in the same spirit:</p>
<p class="extract">The liability undoubtedly exists . . . but whether we could be called on to carry out our obligation and to vindicate the neutrality of Belgium in opposing its violation must necessarily depend upon our policy at the time and the circumstances of the moment. Supposing that France violated the neutrality of Belgium in a war against Germany it is, under present circumstances, doubtful whether England or Russia would move a finger to maintain Belgian neutrality, while, if the neutrality of Belgium were violated by Germany, it is probable that the converse would be the case.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Grey, commenting in a further minute, merely observed that this reflexion was ‘to the point’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn8" id="ch11_fn8">8</a></p>
<p class="para">Another principle not less elastic than the <span class="italic">clausula</span> has sometimes been invoked to justify non-fulfilment of international obligations – the principle of ‘necessity’ or ‘vital interests’. It is a well-known legal maxim that nobody can be called on to perform the impossible; and the impossible is sometimes held in international law to include acts detrimental to the vital interests (meaning primarily the security) of the state. Some writers have specifically held that every state has a legal right of self-preservation which overrides any obligation to other states. This view is likely to carry particular weight in time of war. In its note of protest against British blockade measures in December 1914, the United States Government laid it down as the principle of international law that belligerents should not interfere with neutral commerce ‘unless such interference is manifestly an imperative necessity to protect their national safety, and then only to the extent that it is a necessity’. The British Government gratefully accepted this interpretation, and was thenceforth able to justify its blockade activities on the uncontested ground of an ‘imperative necessity’ whose requirements nobody was as well qualified as itself to assess.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn9" id="ch11_fn9">9</a> In such emergencies, the layman is apt to discard legal niceties and arrive at the same result by other methods. At the time of the Jameson Raid, <span class="italic">The Times</span> published a poem by the Poet Laureate which opened with these disarming lines:</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="extract2">Let lawyers and statesmen addle</p>
<p class="extract2">Their pates over points of law:</p>
<p class="extract2"><a id="page_171"/>If sound be our sword and saddle</p>
<p class="extract2">And gun-gear, who cares one straw?<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn10" id="ch11_fn10">10</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent">‘Damn the law, I want the Canal built,’ was a saying popularly attributed to Theodore Roosevelt at the time of the Panama crisis. In 1939 a Japanese ‘naval spokesman’, commenting on the boarding of foreign vessels in Chinese waters by Japanese patrols, is reported to have said: ‘It is not a question of having the right to do this. It is something which is necessary and we are doing it.’<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn11" id="ch11_fn11">11</a> ‘Once it [i.e. the nation] is in danger of oppression or annihilation,’ wrote Hitler, ‘the question of legality plays a subordinate role.’<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn12" id="ch11_fn12">12</a></p>
<p class="para">Indeed, where justification is explicitly or implicitly offered for the nonfulfilment of treaty obligations, it is often difficult to discover from the words used whether the alleged justification is based on legal or on moral grounds. Is the view taken that, by the operation of <span class="italic">clausula rebus sic stantibus</span> or for some other reason, the obligation is no longer binding in law? Or is the legal obligation admitted, and is it argued that the state is entitled to disregard the law on the ground that it is immoral, unreasonable or impracticable, just as the citizen is sometimes morally entitled to disregard the national law? Broadly speaking, it may be said that prior to 1914 the rule <span class="italic">pacta sunt servanda</span> was elastically interpreted and the nonfulfilment of obligations was apt to be defended as legally admissible, whereas since 1919 the interpretation of the rule has tended to become more rigid, and nonfulfilment has been defended mainly on the ground that considerations of reason or morality entitled the state to disregard its strictly legal obligation. The dilemma of international law is that of ecclesiastical dogma. Elastic interpretation adapted to diverse needs increases the number of the faithful. Rigid interpretation, though theoretically desirable, provokes secessions from the church. It cannot be doubted that the more frequent and open repudiation of the rules of international law since 1919 has been due in part to the well-intentioned efforts of the victorious Powers to strengthen those rules and to interpret them with greater rigidity and precision.</p>
<p class="para">An examination of the numerous breaches of treaty obligations during this period yields less definite results than might have been expected; for the state concerned in many cases defended itself either by denying that any breach of treaty obligations has occurred, or by alleging that the treaty had in the first instance been violated by the other party. In December 1932, the French Chamber of Deputies refused to carry out the French War debt agreement with the United States on the ground that ‘the determining circumstances’ had changed since the conclusion of the agreement six years earlier – the nearest approach since 1919 to an explicit <a id="page_172"/>invocation of the <span class="italic">clausula rebus sic stantibus</span>.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn13" id="ch11_fn13">13</a> The British default on the Anglo-American War debt agreement was justified on the ground of ‘economic necessity’. But the main ground of the argument was not legal, but moral: the burden imposed by the agreement was ‘unreasonable’ and ‘inequitable’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn14" id="ch11_fn14">14</a> <span class="italic">The Times</span> took the view that the debt ‘had not the same moral validity as an ordinary commercial transaction’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn15" id="ch11_fn15">15</a> At an earlier stage, Neville Chamberlain, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, had explicitly admitted that the obligation was legally binding, but had appealed to other obligations which might be rated higher than those of law:</p>
<p class="extract">When we are told that contracts must be kept sacred, and that we must on no account depart from the obligations which we have undertaken, it must not be forgotten that we have other obligations and responsibilities, obligations not only to our countrymen, but to many millions of human beings throughout the world, whose happiness or misery may depend upon how far the fulfilment of these obligations is insisted upon on the one side and met on the other.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn16" id="ch11_fn16">16</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">In repudiating the military clauses of the <a id="page_173"/>Versailles Treaty in March 1935, Germany based her action on the alleged failure of the other parties to the treaty to implement their own obligations to disarm. A year later, the repudiation of the Locarno Treaty was justified on the ground that, through the action of France in concluding the Franco-Soviet Pact, the treaty had ‘ceased in practice to exist’.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn17" id="ch11_fn17">17</a> These were at any rate ostensibly legal arguments. But in a public speech shortly after the occupation of the Rhineland, Hitler rejected the legal in favour of the moral plea: ‘If the rest of the world clings to the letter of treaties, I cling to an eternal morality.’<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn18" id="ch11_fn18">18</a></p>
<p class="para">On the whole, therefore, it may be said that breaches of treaties between the two wars were excused, not on the legal ground of derogations admitted by international law to the principle of the sanctity of treaties, but on the ethical ground that certain treaties, though legally binding, lack moral validity. It was not denied that breaches of such treaties are technical breaches of international law; but they were an offence against international morality. It is important for the student of international ethics and international law to study the qualities which were popularly supposed to make treaties morally disreputable and therefore morally invalid.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch11-head2">Treaties signed under duress</p>
<p class="NoIndent">In the first place, it came to be felt that there was a moral taint about treaties signed under duress. This feeling attached itself mainly to the Versailles Treaty, signed by Germany under the duress of a five-day ultimatum. German propaganda worked hard to popularize the conception of the Versailles Treaty as a <span class="italic">Diktat</span> which had no moral validity; and the idea enjoyed widespread currency after the conclusion of the Locarno Treaty, when British and French statesmen rashly vied with Stresemann in emphasizing the moral significance of the voluntary acceptance by Germany of some of the obligations accepted under duress at Versailles. The attitude adopted to treaties concluded under duress is dependent on the attitude adopted to war; for every treaty which brings a war to an end is almost inevitably accepted by the loser under duress. So long therefore as any kind of war whatever is recognized as moral, treaties concluded under duress cannot be unconditionally condemned as immoral. The moral objections most frequently expressed against the Versailles Treaty seem, in fact, to have been based not so much on its signature under duress as on the severity of its contents, and on the fact that the Allied Governments, reversing the procedure followed at all important peace conferences down to and including that of Brest-Litovsk, refused to engage in oral negotiations with the plenipotentiaries of the defeated Power. This act of unwisdom probably discredited the treaty more than the ultimatum which preceded its signature.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch11-head3">Inequitable treaties</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Secondly, the view was commonly taken that treaties may be morally invalidated by the character of their contents. There cannot indeed be any rule of international <span class="italic">law</span> corresponding to the rule of municipal law voiding contracts which are ‘immoral’ or ‘contrary to public policy’. The absence of an international political order makes impossible any <span class="italic">legal</span> definition of international public policy or of what is internationally immoral.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn19" id="ch11_fn19">19</a> But those who regard the contents of a given international treaty as immoral will, generally speaking, concede to the injured state the moral right to repudiate it; for international law provides no other means of redress. It should, moreover, be observed that there is a tendency to concede the same moral right to repudiate a treaty which is not, properly speaking, immoral, but which is inequitable in the sense that it imposes conditions flagrantly incompatible with the existing relations of power between the contracting parties. The disarmament clauses of the Versailles Treaty were widely regarded as lacking in validity because it was unreasonable to impose a position of permanent inferiority on a Great Power. In general, the reproach was levelled against the Versailles Treaty that it sought to perpetuate the temporary weakness of Germany due to her collapse at the end of the War. This argument is not perhaps strictly ethical, since it is rooted in the power position and recognizes a moral right based simply on strength. But it is an illustration of the curious way in which power and <a id="page_174"/>ethics are intertwined in all political problems. A somewhat similar case arose in connexion with Article 16 of the Covenant of the League of Nations. When the United States failed to ratify the Covenant, it was widely felt that the obligations imposed by that Article were no longer morally binding, since members of the League could not reasonably be expected to take measures which might bring on them the enmity of so powerful a country. The test of what is commonly recognized as reasonable applies to the moral validity of treaties as to other problems of international morality.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch11-head4">Treaties as instruments of power</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The third consideration which is sometimes invoked to deny the morally binding character of international treaties is of a more sweeping kind. It is designed to cast doubts on the moral credit not of particular treaties, but of all treaties as being by their nature instruments of power and therefore devoid of moral value. A Marxist writer has argued that, in capitalist society, the legal enforcement of contracts is merely a method of using the power of the state to protect and further the interests of the ruling class.<a class="sup" href="#ch11-fn20" id="ch11_fn20">20</a> In the same way, it can be maintained with considerable show of reason that insistence on the legal validity of international treaties is a weapon used by the ruling nations to maintain their supremacy over weaker nations on whom the treaties have been imposed. Such an argument is implicit in the realist view of law as an oppressive instrument of power divorced from ethics.</p>
<p class="para">The argument is assisted by the elastic and inconsistent manner in which the doctrine of the sanctity of treaties has been applied in the practice of states. In 1932–33, the French and British Governments were insisting with particular vehemence that the disarmament clauses of the Versailles Treaty were legally binding on Germany, and could be revised only with the consent of the interested Powers. In December 1932, the French Chamber of Deputies found reasons for refusing to carry out the French war debt agreement with the United States. In June 1933, the British Government ceased to pay the regular instalments due under its war debt agreement, substituting minor ‘token payments’; and a year later these token payments came to an end. Yet in 1935 Great Britain and France once more joined in a solemn condemnation of Germany for unilaterally repudiating her obligations under the disarmament clauses of the Versailles Treaty. Such inconsistencies are so common that the realist finds little difficulty in reducing them to a simple rule. The element of power is inherent in every political treaty. The contents of such a treaty reflect in some degree the relative strength of the contracting parties. Stronger states <a id="page_175"/>will insist on the sanctity of the treaties concluded by them with weaker states. Weaker states will renounce treaties concluded by them with stronger states as soon as the power position alters and the weaker state feels itself strong enough to reject or modify the obligation. Since 1918, the United States have concluded no treaty with a stronger state, and have therefore unreservedly upheld the sanctity of treaties. Great Britain concluded the war debt agreement with a country financially stronger than herself, and defaulted. She concluded no other important treaty with a stronger Power and, with this single exception, upheld the sanctity of treaties. The countries which had concluded the largest number of treaties with states stronger than themselves, and subsequently strengthened their position, were Germany, Italy and Japan; and these are the countries which renounced or violated the largest number of treaties. But it would be rash to assume any <span class="italic">moral</span> distinction between these different attitudes. There is no reason to assume that these countries would insist any less strongly than Great Britain or the United States on the sanctity of treaties favourable to themselves concluded by them with weaker states.</p>
<p class="para">The case is convincing as far as it goes. The rule <span class="italic">pacta sunt servanda</span> is not a moral principle, and its application cannot always be justified on ethical grounds. It is a rule of international law; and as such it not only is, but is universally recognized to be, necessary to the existence of an international society. But law does not purport to solve every political problem; and where it fails, the fault often lies with those who seek to put it to uses for which it was never intended. It is no reproach to law to describe it as a bulwark of the existing order. The essence of law is to promote stability and maintain the existing framework of society; and it is perfectly natural everywhere for conservatives to describe themselves as the party of law and order, and to denounce radicals as disturbers of the peace and enemies of the law. The history of every society reveals a strong tendency on the part of those who want important changes in the existing order to commit acts which are illegal or which can plausibly be denounced as such by conservatives. It is true that in highly organized societies, where legally constituted machinery exists for bringing about changes in the law, this tendency to illegal action is mitigated. But it is never removed altogether. Radicals are always more likely than conservatives to come into conflict with the law.</p>
<p class="para">Before 1914, international law did not condemn as illegal <a id="page_176"/>resort to war for the purpose of changing the existing international order; and no legally constituted machinery existed for bringing about changes in any other way. After 1918 opinion condemning ‘aggressive’ war became almost universal, and nearly all the nations of the world signed a pact renouncing resort to war as an instrument of policy. While therefore resort to war for the purpose of altering the <span class="italic">status quo</span> now usually involves the breach of a treaty obligation and is accordingly illegal in international law, no effective international machinery has been constituted for bringing about changes by pacific means. The rude nineteenth-century system, or lack of system, was logical in recognizing as legal the one effective method of changing the <span class="italic">status quo</span>. The rejection of the traditional method as illegal and the failure to provide any effective alternative have made contemporary international law a bulwark of the existing order to an extent unknown in previous international law or in the municipal law of any civilized country. This is the most fundamental cause of the recent decline of respect for international law; and those who, in deploring the phenomenon, fail to recognize its origin, not unnaturally expose themselves to the charge of hypocrisy or of obtuseness.</p>
<p class="para">Of all the considerations which render unlikely the general observance of the legal rule of the sanctity of treaties, and which provide a plausible moral justification for the repudiation of treaties, this last is by far the most important. Respect for international law and for the sanctity of treaties will not be increased by the sermons of those who, having most to gain from the maintenance of the existing order, insist most firmly on the morally binding character of the law. Respect for law and treaties will be maintained only in so far as the law recognizes effective political machinery through which it can itself be modified and superseded. There must be a clear recognition of that play of political forces which is antecedent to all law. Only when these forces are in stable equilibrium can the law perform its social function without becoming a tool in the hands of the defenders of the <span class="italic">status quo</span>. The achievement of this equilibrium is not a legal, but a political task.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch11-head5">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn1" id="ch11-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Walz in <span class="italic">Deutsches Recht</span>, Jg. IV. (1934), p. 525. Professor Lauterpacht’s remark that the rule <span class="italic">pacta sunt servanda</span> ‘constitutes the highest, irreducible, final criterion’ in international society (<span class="italic">The Function of Law in the International Community</span>, p. 418) is a good example of the attitude criticized.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn2" id="ch11-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lamartine’s Circular of 5 March 1848, published in the <span class="italic">Moniteur</span> of that date.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn3" id="ch11-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bismarck, <span class="italic">Gedanken und Erinnerungen</span>, ii. p. 258.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn4" id="ch11-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in H. F. Pringle, <span class="italic">Theodore Roosevelt</span>, p. 309.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn5" id="ch11-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Miller, <span class="italic">The Drafting of the Covenant</span>, i. p. 293.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn6" id="ch11-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Krabbe, <span class="italic">The Modern Idea of the State</span> (Engl. transl.), p. 266.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn7" id="ch11-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in Grey, <span class="italic">Speeches on Foreign Affairs</span>, 1904–1914, p. 307.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn8" id="ch11-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">British Documents on the Origin of the War</span>, ed. Gooch and Temperley, viii. pp. 377–8.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn9" id="ch11-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The correspondence was published in Cmd 7816 of 1915.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_177"/><a href="#ch11_fn10" id="ch11-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 11 January 1896.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn11" id="ch11-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 26 May 1939.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn12" id="ch11-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 104.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn13" id="ch11-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Resolution of 14 December 1932, in <span class="italic">Documents on International Affairs</span>, 1932,</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn14" id="ch11-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The quotations are from the British note of 4 June 1934 (Cmd 4609).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn15" id="ch11-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 2 June 1934.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn16" id="ch11-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Speech in the House of Commons, 14 December 1932, in <span class="italic">Documents on International Affairs</span>, 1932, p. 128.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn17" id="ch11-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Diplomatic Discussions Directed Towards a European Settlement</span>, Cmd 5143, p. 78.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn18" id="ch11-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in Toynbee, <span class="italic">Survey of International Affairs</span>, 1936, p. 319. Such pleas are not peculiarly modern and have often been regarded as legitimate. As recently as 1908, a distinguished English historian used of Pitt words which, with the bare change of proper names, are precisely apposite to Hitler’s attitude: ‘His support of the British claim as “from God and Nature” to override the artificial restrictions of unjust treaties, his denunciation of the Convention of the Pardo as “a stipulation for the national ignominy”, voiced the inarticulate sentiment of the new England’ (<span class="italic">Quarterly Review</span>, October 1908, p. 325). A later passage in the same article runs as follows: ‘By the alchemy of his own intense vision and political ideals, he imposed on England a conception of national development and national ends based on an ideal of Imperialist expansion to realize which the nation must sacrifice everything or cease to believe in its own right and power to exist’ (<span class="italic">ibid</span>., pp. 334–5). It is interesting to observe that the writer clearly regarded these phrases as eulogistic.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn19" id="ch11-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Some German writers after 1919 tried to maintain that treaties are invalid in international law if they conflict with the ‘natural law of nations’. The literature is reviewed by Verdross, <span class="italic">American Journal of International Law</span>, xxxi. (October 1937), pp. 571 sqq. But this view has found little support elsewhere. On the occasion of a judgement by the Permanent Court of International Justice in 1934, the German judge, in an individual opinion, expressed the view that the Court ‘would never apply a convention whose contents were contrary to bonnes ma:urs’ (Permanent Court of International Justice, Series A/B No. 63, p. 150). But the Court as such never appears to have committed itself to this proposition.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch11_fn20" id="ch11-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Renner, <span class="italic">Die Rechtsinstitute des Privatrechts und ibre soziale Funktion</span>, p. 55.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>