<div class="delete">

<h1><a id="page_178"></a>CHAPTER TWELVE</h1>
<h2>The Judicial Settlement of International Disputes</h2>
<p class="NoIndent">Besides upholding legal rights, the law provides machinery for settling disputes about these rights. The jurisdiction of national courts is compulsory. Any person cited before a court must enter an appearance or lose his case by default; and the decision of the court is binding on all concerned.</p>
<p class="para">International law, though it provides machinery for the settlement of disputes, recognizes no compulsory jurisdiction. Down to the end of the nineteenth century, the judicial process as applied to international disputes almost invariably took the form of an <span class="italic">ad hoc</span> agreement to submit a particular dispute to an arbitrator or arbitrators, whose method of appointment was fixed by the agreement and whose verdict was accepted in advance as binding. Under the Hague Convention of 1899, a Permanent Court of Arbitration was established at The Hague. This was, however, not a court, but a standing panel from which suitable arbitrators could be selected by states desiring to resort to arbitration. The Permanent Court of International Justice established under the Covenant of the League of Nations really was a court sitting as such. But it exercised jurisdiction only with the consent of the parties, whether that consent was expressed in an <span class="italic">ad hoc</span> agreement relating to the particular dispute or in a general agreement between the parties to submit to the Court all disputes falling within certain categories. ‘It is well established in international law’, declared the Court itself in one of its judgements, ‘that no state can, without its consent, be compelled to submit its disputes with other states either to mediation or to arbitration or to any other kind of pacific settlement.’<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn1" id="ch12_fn1">1</a></p>
<h3 id="ch12-head1">Justiciable and non-justiciable disputes</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">In municipal law, all disputes are theoretically justiciable; for if the point at issue is covered by no legal rule, the answer of the court will be that the complainant has no case. It is true that the complainant may not be satisfied with this answer, and may seek to obtain redress by political action. But this merely means that he does not want a legal answer, not that the law has no answer to give, or that the answer is not legally binding. In international law, all disputes are not justiciable; for no court is competent <a id="page_179"></a>unless the parties to the dispute have agreed to confer jurisdiction on it and to recognize its decision as binding. Many treaties are in existence in which the parties define the kinds of disputes which they agree to recognize as justiciable as between themselves. In some treaties before 1914, disputes of certain limited and specific categories were recognized as justiciable. In others, the definition of justiciable disputes took a negative and somewhat elastic form: the parties to the treaty undertook to submit to arbitration any dispute between them which did not affect their ‘vital interests’, ‘independence’ or ‘national honour’. The nearest approach to a definition of justiciable disputes was contained in Article 13 of the League Covenant, and repeated in Article 36 of the Permanent Court, which enumerated various kinds of dispute ‘declared to be among those which are generally suitable for submission to arbitration or judicial settlement’. Finally several arbitration treaties concluded after 1919, notably those negotiated at Locarno, recognized as justiciable what were called disputes between the parties ‘as to their respective rights’.</p>
<p class="para">The formulae of the Covenant and the Statute and of the Locarno arbitration treaties have given a strong impetus to the idea that international disputes could be classified by an objective test as <span class="italic">ipso facto</span> justiciable and <span class="italic">ipso facto</span> non-justiciable. Any such classification rests on an illusion. The formulae in question provide no objective definition of a justiciable dispute. They merely indicate certain kinds of dispute which the parties to these instruments agree to recognize as justiciable between themselves. The formula of the Covenant and the Statue is not really a definition at all, but an enumeration of examples which does not purport to be either exhaustive or (as the qualification ‘generally’ shows) authoritative.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn2" id="ch12_fn2">2</a> The Locarno formula is an attempt to give an objective character to the distinction between justiciable and non-justiciable disputes by identifying it with the distinction between conflicts of legal right and conflicts of interest. This formula has little practical value. It merely binds the parties to recognize as justiciable any dispute which they agree to regard as an issue of law. Either party can withdraw any dispute from arbitration by the simple process of placing itself on some other ground than that of legal right. Thus, the British Government, if it had been bound by such a treaty, would presumably have refused to submit to arbitration its default on the war debt agreement with the United States on the ground that the point at issue was not the legal right of the United States to demand payment, and that the dispute was not therefore one as to ‘respective rights’. As Professor Lauterpacht has conclusively shown, there is no objective criterion of the ‘suitability’ of a dispute for judicial settlement. ‘It is not the nature of an individual dispute which makes it unfit for judicial settlement but the unwillingness of a state to have it <a id="page_180"></a>settled by the application of law.’<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn3" id="ch12_fn3">3</a> The question which confronts us is twofold: Why are states willing to submit only certain kinds of dispute to judicial settlement, and why do they find it so difficult to define in clear terms what kinds of dispute they are willing to submit?</p>
<p class="para">The answer to this question must be sought in the necessary relation of law to politics. The judicial settlement of disputes presupposes the existence of law and the recognition that it is binding; and the agreement which makes the law and which treats it as binding is a political fact. The applicability of judicial procedure depends therefore on explicit or implicit political agreement. In international relations, political agreement tends to be restricted to those spheres which do not affect the security and existence of the state; and it is primarily in these spheres that the judicial settlement of disputes is effective. The majority of international disputes which have in the past been settled by arbitration or by some other legal procedure have been either pecuniary claims or disputes about national frontiers in remote and sparsely inhabited regions. The exclusion, in arbitration treaties concluded before 1914, of disputes affecting ‘vital interests’, ‘independence’ or ‘national honour’ meant the exclusion of precisely those matters on which political agreement could not be attained. When political disagreement threatened, arbitration was recognized as impracticable. We shall see presently that what is virtually the same reservation was maintained in subsequent agreements for arbitration or judicial settlement in the form of the exclusion from these agreements of disputes endangering the sanctity of existing treaties or existing legal rights.</p>
<p class="para">The same consideration explains why no definition of disputes recognized as justiciable can be universally or permanently valid; for political agreement is a factor which varies from place to place and from time to time.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn4" id="ch12_fn4">4</a> Prior to 1917 there was a general political understanding throughout the world that the property rights of individuals were valid, and that a foreigner whose property was for any reason confiscated by the government of the country in which it was situated had a claim in international law to compensation. So long as this understanding existed, claims based upon it could be settled by arbitration. With the establishment of the Soviet régime in Russia, this understanding ceased to apply to that country; and when the Soviet Government made its first important international appearance at the Genoa Conference in 1922, it was careful to scout in advance the idea that property claims against it should be submitted to arbitration. ‘In the trial of disputes of this kind’, ran the memorandum which it submitted to the Conference, ‘the specific disagreements will inevitably end in opposing to one another two forms of property.... In such circumstances there can be no question of an impartial super-arbiter.’ And when, at the subsequent Hague Conference, <a id="page_181"></a>the British delegate pathetically enquired ‘whether it would be impossible to find a single impartial judge in the whole world’, Mr Litvinov firmly replied that ‘it was necessary to face the fact that there was not one world, but two, a Soviet world and a non-Soviet world’.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn5" id="ch12_fn5">5</a> ‘Impartiality’ is a meaningless concept where there is no common ground at all between the two contending views. Judicial procedure cannot operate without accepted political postulates.</p>
<p class="para">The assumption of the British delegate just quoted that the obstacle to international arbitration was the difficulty of finding impartial judges had been heard on previous occasions. ‘The great obstacle to the extension of arbitration’, declared the American delegate at the Hague Conference of 1907, ‘is not the unwillingness of civilized nations to submit their disputes to the decision of an arbitral tribunal; it is rather an apprehension that the tribunal selected will not be impartial.’ Lord Salisbury is quoted in a similar sense.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn6" id="ch12_fn6">6</a> This opinion rests on a misapprehension. The potential personal bias of the international judge is not the real stumbling-block. The popular prejudice against submitting matters of national concern to the verdict of a ‘foreigner’ is based primarily, not on the belief that the foreign judge will be biased as between the parties, but on the fact that there are certain fundamentals of a political character which we are not prepared to have challenged by any foreign authority, whether judicial or political. The abolition of private ownership for Soviet Russia, the right of blockade for Great Britain, the Monroe Doctrine for the United States are familiar examples of such political fundamentals. Such fundamentals need not, however, be major issues at all. Palmerston treated the Don Pacifico episode in 1850, and Signor Mussolini the murder of an Italian general in Greece in 1923, as political issues which they were not prepared to submit to judicial settlement.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn7" id="ch12_fn7">7</a></p>
<p class="para">But there is another and more general sense in which the absence of common political presupposition impedes the development of the judicial process in the international community. Municipal law, though far more fully and minutely developed than international law, is never wholly self-sufficing. The application of the law to the particular case is always liable to involve an element of judicial discretion, since the legislator can hardly have foreseen all the relevant circumstances of every case arising under the law. ‘There are many situations’, writes Dean Pound, ‘where the course of judicial action is left to be determined wholly by the judge’s individual sense of what is right.’<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn8" id="ch12_fn8">8</a> It would perhaps have been fairer to say that the good judge will be guided in such cases not so much by his own ‘individual sense of what is right’ as by the sense of right generally accepted by the community whose servant he is. But that some ‘sense of what is right’, whether individual or general, is a necessary <a id="page_182"></a>ingredient of many judicial decisions, few will care to deny. The importance of the political presuppositions which inspire the Supreme Court of the United States in the interpretation of the Constitution, and the way in which, in the course of American history, these presuppositions have changed in response to changing social conditions, is well known.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn9" id="ch12_fn9">9</a> The problem is, in its final analysis, the fundamental one of the relation of the rights of the individual to the needs of the community. Every national community has necessarily found a working solution of this problem. The international community has not yet done so. The controversy about the freedom of the seas shows that Great Britain would be unwilling to risk any interpretation of her maritime rights by an international court in the light of the supposed needs of the international community as a whole; and there are important matters on which every other Great Power would make similar reservations. The absence of an accepted view of the general good of the community as a whole overriding the particular good of any individual member of it, which we have already noted as the crucial problem of international morality, also stands in the way of the development of judicial settlement in its application to international disputes.</p>
<p class="para">We find, therefore, in the problem of the justiciability of international disputes another illustration of the fact that law is a function of political society, is dependent for its development on the development of that society, and is conditioned by the political presuppositions which that society shares in common. It follows that the strengthening of international law, and the extension of the number and character of international disputes recognized as suitable for judicial settlement, is a political, not a legal, problem. There is no principle of law which enables one to decide that a given issue is suitable for treatment by legal methods. The decision is political; and its character is likely to be determined by the political development of the international community or of the political relations between the countries concerned. Similarly, there is no principle of law which enables one to decide whether a rule of law or a legal institution which has proved its value in a national community should be introduced by analogy into international law. The sole valid criterion is whether the present stage of political development of the international community is such as to justify the introduction of the rule or institution in question. In modern international relations, the machinery of judicial settlement has been developed far in advance of the political order in which alone it can effectively operate. Further progress towards the extension of the judicial settlement of international disputes can be made, not by perfecting an already too perfect machinery, but by developing political co-operation. The fact that the members of the British Commonwealth of Nations have hitherto steadfastly refused to set up any kind of permanent <a id="page_183"></a>and obligatory procedure for the judicial settlement of disputes between one another should serve as a warning to those who are disposed to attach undue importance to the perfection of judicial machinery in international relations. It is a curious paradox that, by signing the Optional Clause of the Statute of the Permanent Court and by excluding from its operation inter-Commonwealth disputes, Great Britain and Dominions are bound in this respect towards many foreign countries by an obligation more far-reaching than they have assumed among themselves.</p>
<h3 id="ch12-head2">Projects of ‘all-in arbitration’</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">Many thinkers of the period between the two wars went, however, far beyond mere plans for the modest and gradual extension of the scope of judicial procedure in international relations. It became a widely cherished ambition to provide, by a stroke of the pen, for the compulsory settlement of all international disputes by arbitration. Schemes for obligatory arbitration were mooted on many occasions prior to 1914, but failed to win acceptance. The Covenant of the League of Nations, while providing for the establishment of the Permanent Court and encouraging the submission of suitable disputes to arbitration or judicial settlement, gave little encouragement to the advocates of obligatory arbitration. In all disputes, it left the choice of the procedure to the discretion of the states concerned; and the political procedure of ‘enquiry by the Council’ always remained open. It was precisely this political aspect of the Covenant which became a target for the attacks of the utopian school. A widespread feeling grew up that the way to establish an international ‘rule of law’ and avoid future wars was for states to submit all international disputes of every kind to an international arbitral tribunal having power to decide them at its discretion on grounds either of strict law or of equity and common sense. Such was the vague conception summed up in the popular catchword of ‘all-in arbitration’. This demand for ‘all-in arbitration’ was supposed to have been met by the Geneva Protocol and by the General Act. It was widely believed that, had the British Government not rejected the Protocol, or had the General Act been accepted without reservations by the principal Powers, a satisfactory procedure would have been in existence for the compulsory arbitration of all international disputes and an important cause of war removed.</p>
<p class="para">But here we come upon an extraordinary confusion, or series of confusions, of thought which, throughout this period, enveloped and obscured the problem of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. When the League Covenant, by an amendment inserted after the establishment of the Permanent Court of International Justice, set <a id="page_184"></a>‘judicial settlement’ side by side with ‘arbitration’, ‘arbitration’ meant the verdict of a judge or a tribunal appointed <span class="italic">ad hoc</span>, and ‘judicial settlement’ the verdict of a regularly constituted court; and there is no reason to suppose that any other distinction was intended between them. But the misguided attempt to discover an objective distinction between justiciable and non-justiciable disputes led to an equally fallacious distinction between ‘judicial settlement’, meaning the settlement of ‘justiciable’ disputes in accordance with the letter of the law, and ‘arbitration’, meaning the settlement of ‘non-justiciable’ disputes, which were not covered by the letter of the law, on grounds of equity. This conception left its traces on the Geneva Protocol. According to the Assembly report on that instrument, ‘the arbitrators need not necessarily be jurists’, and if they obtain an advisory opinion on any point of law from the Permanent Court, that opinion is ‘not legally binding on them’.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn10" id="ch12_fn10">10</a> But the distinction between ‘judicial settlement’ and ‘arbitration’ was first fully developed in the General Act. Under this instrument, disputes ‘with regard to which the parties are in conflict as to their respective rights’ were to be referred to the Permanent Court for ‘judicial settlement’. All other international disputes were to be referred for ‘arbitration’ to an arbitral tribunal. In the absence of any agreed stipulation to the contrary, the tribunal, in pronouncing its judgement was to apply the same rules of law as were applied by the Permanent Court. But ‘in so far as there exists no such rule applicable to the dispute, the tribunal shall decide <span class="italic">ex aequo et bono’</span>. This reference to rules of law seems incomprehensible. If the dispute turned on legal rights, it would be submitted not to the arbitral tribunal, but to the Permanent Court. If it did not turn on legal rights, the dispute could not be solved by the application of legal rules. The conception that there is a class of international disputes which arise, so to speak, <span class="italic">in vacuo</span>, and are not affected by any existing legal rights or by any rule of international law, is a pure myth.</p>
<p class="para">A more serious confusion is, however, in store. There is a perfectly valid distinction, familiar both in national and in international affairs, between ‘legal’ disputes, arising out of claims which purport to be based on existing legal rights, and ‘political’ disputes arising out of claims to alter existing legal rights. The difference turns, however, not on the nature of the dispute, but on the question whether the complainant seeks his remedy through legal or through political procedure. In the state, claims of the former kind are dealt with by the courts, claims of the latter kind by political action. The individual who fails to get his grievance remedied by a court may seek a remedy for the same grievance through legislation. Internationally, the distinction is less clear cut. No international court is recognized as competent to settle all ‘legal’ disputes, and there is no recognized machinery to settle all ‘political’ disputes. In these <a id="page_185"></a>circumstances, states making claims against other states are not obliged to make it clear, and do not always make it clear, whether the claim is based on legal rights or is tantamount to a demand to alter those rights. But the distinction, though sometimes obscured in practice, is real enough. Both nationally and internationally, ‘political’ disputes are, generally speaking, more serious and more dangerous than ‘legal’ disputes. Revolutions and wars are less likely to arise from disputes about existing legal rights than from the desire to change those rights. The wise politician, and the wise student of politics, will devote a great deal of attention to political disputes.</p>
<p class="para">When, therefore, it was officially claimed that the Geneva Protocol constituted ‘a system for the pacific settlement of <span class="italic">all disputes</span> which might ever arise’,<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn11" id="ch12_fn11">11</a> or that the General Act provided ‘a comprehensive method of settling all international disputes of whatever character’,<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn12" id="ch12_fn12">12</a> the conclusion might reasonably have been drawn, and was in fact drawn by many people, that provision had been made for the settlement by arbitration of political disputes, i.e. of disputes arising from claims to modify existing legal rights. Closer inspection did not, however, justify this conclusion. In an inconspicuous passage of the Assembly report on the Protocol, it was explained that the procedure did not apply to ‘disputes which aim at revising treaties and international acts in force or which seek to jeopardize the existing territorial integrity of signatory states’. In fact, added the <span class="italic">rapporteur</span>, ‘the impossibility of applying compulsory arbitration to such cases was so obvious that it was quite superfluous to make them the subject of a special provision’.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn13" id="ch12_fn13">13</a> The General Act is less ingenuous. It purports to enforce compulsory arbitration for disputes which are not disputes about the ‘respective rights’ of the parties. It purports to authorize the arbitral tribunal to decide such disputes <span class="italic">ex aequo et bono</span>. But the authorization applies only ‘in so far as there exists no [legal] rule applicable to the dispute’; and this qualification has the same effect as the reservation in the report on the Geneva Protocol. The essence of a political dispute is the demand that the relevant legal rule, though admittedly applicable, shall not be applied. When a dispute arises through the claim of a state that its existing frontiers, or existing treaty restrictions on its sovereignty, or existing obligations under a financial agreement, are intolerable, it is useless to refer it to an arbitral tribunal whose first duty is to apply the legal ‘rule applicable to the dispute’. The legal right exists and is uncontested. The dispute arises from a demand to change it. Political disputes cannot be settled within the framework of the law by tribunals applying rules of law. The Geneva Protocol and General Act, though purporting to provide for the peaceful settlement of all international disputes, in fact left the most important and dangerous category of international disputes untouched.</p>
<p class="para"><a id="page_186"></a>No scheme of ‘all-in arbitration’ more inclusive than the make-believe of the Geneva Protocol and the General Act was officially propounded or considered. Some governments were prepared to accept arbitration for such disputes as did not endanger the existing political order – a limitation hardly less restrictive than the vital interests, independence and national honour of the older arbitration treaties. But no government was willing to entrust to an international court the power to modify its legal rights. Some theorists, however, were more ready than practical statesmen to brush this difficulty aside, and were quite prepared to entrust to a so-called arbitral tribunal the task not only of applying existing rights, but of creating new ones. A British organization called the New Commonwealth Society evolved an elaborate scheme for an arbitral tribunal which would ‘determine, on the basis of equity and good conscience, political disputes, including those which have to do with the revision of treaties’, thus establishing ‘an indirect method of legislation in the affairs of nations’ by an equity tribunal.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn14" id="ch12_fn14">14</a> Such a scheme would appear to be the necessary corollary of Professor Lauterpacht’s belief that international ‘conflicts of interests are due … to the imperfections of international legal organisation’.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn15" id="ch12_fn15">15</a> International conflicts of interests will in future be resolved by a tribunal which will become the supreme organ of world government, exercising not merely the judicial function of interpreting the rights of states, but the legislative function of changing them. Thus will be realized another distinguished international lawyer’s dream of ‘an international legal community whose centre of gravity is in the administration of international justice’.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn16" id="ch12_fn16">16</a></p>
<p class="para">These theories have one important merit. They recognize the fallacy, implicit in the Geneva Protocol and the General Act, that an international legal order based on the recognition, interpretation and enforcement of existing rights is an adequate provision for the peaceful settlement of international disputes. But in avoiding this fallacy, they fall into a still graver one. Perceiving that provision must be made for the modification of existing rights, they force this essentially political function into a legal mould and entrust its exercise to a tribunal. Unwilling to recognize the political basis of every legal system, they dissolve politics into law. In this quasi-judicial twilight, the judge becomes the legislator, political issues are settled by an impartial tribunal on grounds of equity and common sense, and the distinction between law and politics disappears.</p>
<p class="para">The extreme difficulty of the international problem is no doubt responsible for the prescription of so heroic a remedy. But the fact that the problem is difficult scarcely justifies us in propounding a solution which nobody regards as either feasible or desirable in our far more highly organized national communities. The obligatory arbitration of international <a id="page_187"></a>disputes of all kinds is, according to Professor Lauterpacht, ‘<span class="italic">a sine qua non</span> of the normal machinery for the preservation of peace’.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn17" id="ch12_fn17">17</a> Yet obligatory arbitration of claims not based on legal right is rarely enforced in civilized states, and least of all in those which enjoy the longest record of domestic peace. It does not occur to us to attribute ‘conflicts of interests’ in our domestic politics to the imperfections of our legal organization, or to submit to a national arbitral tribunal, for impartial decision on grounds of equity and common sense, disputes about the necessity of conscription, the abolition of the means test, the legal status of trade unions, or the nationalization of mines. The difficulty is not that we could not find a group of impartial persons deeply imbued with the principles of equity and common sense, but that impartiality, equity and common sense are not the primary, or at any rate not the sole, qualities which we require in a decision of such issues. These are political issues, and are settled by procedure which allows for the intrusion of power, whether in the form of a majority vote, as in democracies, or of the will of a dictator or a party, as in authoritarian states. Neither in democracies nor in authoritarian states are such issues decided by an ‘impartial’ tribunal.</p>
<h3 id="ch12-head3">The inapplicability of judicial procedure to ‘political’ disputes</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">Why then is it necessary, not only in theory, for the sake of clear thinking, but also in practice, for the sake of good government, to preserve this distinction between the legal and political, between issues which we are willing to have settled by judicial procedure on grounds of existing legal rights, and issues which can only be settled by political procedure because they turn on a demand for the modification of existing legal rights?</p>
<p class="para">The first answer is that judicial procedure differs fundamentally from political procedure in excluding the factor of power. When a dispute is submitted to a court, the presupposition is that any difference in power between the parties is irrelevant. The law recognizes no inequality other than inequality of legal right. In politics, the converse presupposition holds. Here power is an essential factor in every dispute. The settlement of a conflict of interest between British agriculturalists and British industrialists will depend, in part at any rate, on their respective voting strength and the respective ‘pulls’ which they can exercise on the government. The settlement of a conflict of interest between the United States and Nicaragua will depend, in greater part (for the ratio of power to other factors is higher in international than in national politics), on the relative strength of the two countries. Conflicts of interest can be dealt with only by an organ which takes the power factor into account. Nothing is gained, <a id="page_188"></a>and the proper function of law is debased and discredited, if this political function is entrusted to a tribunal whose constitution and procedure are deliberately assimilated to those of a court of law. As Mr Bernard Shaw has remarked, the functions of judge and legislator are ‘mutually exclusive’: the former must ignore every interest, the latter take every interest into account.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn18" id="ch12_fn18">18</a></p>
<p class="para">The second answer is equally fundamental. We have seen that even the strictly judicial procedure of a court sometimes entails political pre-suppositions, if only because the application of the law to the particular case is always liable to involve an element of judicial discretion, and this discretion, if it is not to be purely capricious, must draw its inspiration from those presuppositions. Where a tribunal is called upon to decide not on issues of legal right, but on claims to set aside legal rights in favour of equity or common sense, the necessity of clearly defined political presuppositions becomes all the more obvious. In such cases, judicial discretion instead of being limited to points left ambiguous by the law, has infinite scope; and the decisions of the tribunal, if they are not to be mere expressions of individual opinion, must be based on well-established assumptions shared by the community as a whole or by those who speak in its name. The existence of such assumptions in national communities sometimes makes possible the use of arbitration even in political issues; and the same possibility is not entirely excluded in the international sphere. But generally speaking, it is a fundamental obstacle to international arbitration <span class="italic">ex aequo et bono</span> that common assumptions of a far-reaching kind scarcely exist in the international community. To submit to an international tribunal, for decision on grounds not of law, but of equity and common sense, disputes concerning British interests in Egypt or the interests of the United States in the canal zone of Panama, or the future of Danzig, or the frontiers of Bulgaria, would have been impracticable, not only because the settlement of these problems involves issues of power, but also because there is no political agreement even of the vaguest kind as to what equity and common sense mean in relation to such questions. On the rare occasions on which international tribunals have been empowered by the parties to decide issues between them on grounds other than those of strict law, the tribunals have shown the greatest reluctance to avail themselves of the discretion accorded to them; not, as Professor Lauterpacht supposes, because ‘law is more just than loose conceptions of justice and equity’,<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn19" id="ch12_fn19">19</a> but because no responsible tribunal cares to commit itself on any important issue to an authoritative pronouncement as to what is ‘equitable’ or ‘just’ in international relations. An international tribunal, once it has left the comparatively solid ground of international law and legal rights, can find no foothold in any agreed <a id="page_189"></a>conception of equity or common sense or the good of the community. It remains, in Professor Zimmern’s words, ‘an array of wigs and gowns vociferating in emptiness’.<a class="sup" href="#ch12-fn20" id="ch12_fn20">20</a></p>
<p class="para">The crux, however, remains. Political issues, both nationally and internationally, are far more menacing than issues of legal right. The periodical, or rather the constant, revision of existing rights is one of the prime necessities of organized society; and to bring about revision in the international society by means other than war is the most vital problem of contemporary international politics. The first step has been to extricate ourselves from the blind alley of arbitration and judicial procedure, where no solution of this problem is to be found. Having taken this step, we are free to approach it by other, and perhaps more promising, avenues.</p>
<h3 id="ch12-head4">Notes</h3>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn1" id="ch12-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Permanent Court of International Justice</span>, Series 2, No. 5, p. 27.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn2" id="ch12-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Disputes ‘as to the interpretation of a treaty’ are the first category of dispute recognized by the Covenant as ‘generally suitable’ for judicial settlement. It is noteworthy that the framers of the Covenant, who drew up this article, nevertheless rejected a proposal to insert in the Covenant a provision that disputes as to its own interpretation should be submitted to the Permanent Court (Miller, <span class="italic">The Drafting of the Covenant</span>, ii. pp. 349, 516). Behaviour in concrete cases is sometimes more significant than the enunciation <span class="italic">in vacuo</span> of abstract rules.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn3" id="ch12-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lauterpacht, <span class="italic">The Function of Law in the International Community</span>, p. 369 and <span class="italic">passim</span>. It is a pity that Professor Lauterpacht, having brilliantly conducted his analysis up to the point where the unwillingness of states is recognized as the limiting factor in the justiciability of international disputes, should have been content to leave it there, treating this ‘unwillingness’, in true utopian fashion, as perverse and undeserving of the attention of an international lawyer.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn4" id="ch12-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The British Government, in its memorandum of 1928 on arbitration (<span class="italic">League of Nations: Official Journal</span>, pp. 694–704), criticized general arbitration treaties on the ground that, in the case of every country, ‘obligations which it may be willing to accept towards one state it may not be willing to accept towards another’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn5" id="ch12-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in Taracouzio, <span class="italic">The Soviet Union and International Law</span>, p. 296.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn6" id="ch12-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Proceedings of the Hague Peace Conference</span> (Engl. transl.: Carnegie Endowment), <span class="italic">Conference of 1907</span>, ii. p. 316.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn7" id="ch12-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">On the latter occasion, Professor Gilbert Murray, representing South Africa on the Assembly of the League of Nations, lamented that a judicial question (i.e. compensation for Italy) had been brought before a political organ and decided on political grounds (<span class="italic">League of Nations: Fourth Assembly</span>, pp. 139 <span class="italic">sqq</span>.) – an excellent example of the fallacy, so trenchantly exposed by Professor Lauterpacht, that certain issues are <span class="italic">ipso facto</span> judicial.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_190"></a><a href="#ch12_fn8" id="ch12-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Roscoe Pound, <span class="italic">Law and Morals</span> (2nd ed.), p. 62.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn9" id="ch12-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Professor Laski remarked many years ago that ‘the foreigner in the United States cannot but observe with the deepest wonder how eagerly possible nominations for a vacant position on the Supreme Court are canvassed’ (Introduction to English translation of Duguit, <span class="italic">Law in the Modern State</span>, p. xxiii). The wonder has grown less deep since the political character of the Court has been better understood.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn10" id="ch12-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Fifth Assembly</span>, First Committee, p. 486.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn11" id="ch12-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Fifth Assembly</span>, p. 497.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn12" id="ch12-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Memorandum on the General Act</span>, Cmd 3803, p. 4.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn13" id="ch12-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Fifth Assembly</span>, p. 194.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn14" id="ch12-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lord Davies, <span class="italic">Force</span>, pp. 73, 81.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn15" id="ch12-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lauterpacht, <span class="italic">The Function of Law in the International Community</span>, p. 250.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn16" id="ch12-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Kelsen, <span class="italic">The Legal Process and International Order</span>, p. 30.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn17" id="ch12-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lauterpacht, <span class="italic">The Function of Law in the International Community</span>, p. 438.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn18" id="ch12-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">G. B. Shaw, <span class="italic">John Bull’s Other Island</span>, Preface.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn19" id="ch12-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lauterpacht, <span class="italic">The Function of Law in the International Community</span>, p. 252.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch12_fn20" id="ch12-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Zimmern, <span class="italic">The League of Nations and the Rule of Law</span>, p. 125. The words are applied to Taft’s international arbitral court. They could be applied, still more appositely, to the equity tribunal advocated by the New Commonwealth Society.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>