<div class="delete">

<h1><a id="page_191"></a>CHAPTER THIRTEEN</h1>
<h2>Peaceful Change</h2>
<p class="NoIndent">Recognition of the need for political change has been a commonplace of thinkers of every period and every shade of opinion. ‘A state without the means of some change’, said Burke in a famous phrase, ‘is without the means of its own conservation.’<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn1" id="ch13_fn1">1</a> In 1853, Marx wrote trenchantly on the Eastern question:</p>
<p class="extract">Impotence…expresses itself in a single proposition: the maintenance of the <span class="italic">status quo</span>. This general conviction that a state of things resulting from hazard and circumstances must be obstinately maintained is a proof of bankruptcy, a confession by the leading Powers of their complete incapacity to further the cause of progress and civilization.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn2" id="ch13_fn2">2</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">And Professor Gilbert Murray has put the same point in a different form:</p>
<p class="extract">War does not always arise from mere wickedness or folly. It sometimes arises from mere growth and movement. Humanity will not stand still.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn3" id="ch13_fn3">3</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">It appears to follow from this view that the attempt to make a moral distinction between wars of ‘aggression’ and wars of ‘defence’ is misguided. If a change is <a id="page_192"></a>necessary and desirable, the use or threatened use of force to maintain the <span class="italic">status quo</span> may be morally more culpable than the use or threatened use of force to alter it. Few people now believe that the action of the American colonists who attacked the <span class="italic">status quo</span> by force in 1776, or of the Irish who attacked the <span class="italic">status quo</span> by force between 1916 and 1920, was necessarily less moral than that of the British who defended it by force. The moral criterion must be not the ‘aggressive’ or ‘defensive’ character of the war, but the nature of the change which is being sought and resisted. ‘Without rebellion, mankind would stagnate and injustice would be irremediable.’<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn4" id="ch13_fn4">4</a> Few serious thinkers maintain that it is always and unconditionally wrong to start a revolution; and it is equally difficult to believe that it is always and unconditionally wrong to start a war. Everyone will, however, agree that war and revolution are undesirable in themselves. The problem of ‘peaceful change’ is, in national politics, how to effect necessary and desirable changes without revolution and, in international politics, how to effect such changes without war.</p>
<p class="para">Every effective demand for change, like every other effective political force, is compounded of power and morality; and the object of peaceful change can be expressed in terms neither of pure power nor of pure morality. It is rather unprofitable, except as an academic exercise, to enquire whether the purpose of any change should be to establish ‘justice’, by remedying ‘just’ grievances, or to maintain ‘peace’, by giving satisfaction to those forces which would otherwise be strong enough to make revolution or war. But it is dangerous to suppose that the two purposes are identical, and that no sacrifice of one or the other is required. Every solution of the problem of political change, whether national or international, must be based on a compromise between morality and power.</p>
<h3 id="ch13-head1">The role of power in political change</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">The necessary role of power in political change will be ignored only by the most superficial observers. Few ‘revisionist’ campaigns in history have been more firmly based on moral considerations than that of the Dreyfusards in France. Yet the protest against the condemnation of Dreyfus would never have been effective if it had not been taken up by powerful political organizations and used by them as a weapon against political opponents. The grievances of Albania and Nicaragua, whatever their moral basis, will never be effective unless they are endorsed, for interested reasons, by some Great Power or Powers. It is fair to attribute the growth of social legislation in the last hundred years to a growing realization of the just grievances of the working class. Yet these results would never have been achieved without the constant use, or threatened use, of force in the form of strikes and revolutions. ‘It is true’, remarks Mr John Strachey, ‘that governments always tell us that they will never yield to force. All history tells us, however, that they never yield to anything else.’<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn5" id="ch13_fn5">5</a> ‘Peaceful secession!’ exclaimed Daniel Webster in 1849. ‘Sir, your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle.’<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn6" id="ch13_fn6">6</a> ‘The winning back of the lost territories’, wrote Hitler in a famous passage of <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, ‘is not achieved through solemn invocations of the Lord God or through pious hopes in a <a id="page_193"></a>League of Nations, but through armed force.’<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn7" id="ch13_fn7">7</a> Hitler might even have appealed to the respectable authority of Gladstone who, in the days when liberalism was still a political force, observed that ‘if no considerations in a political crisis had been addressed to the people of this country except to remember to hate violence and love order and exercise patience, the liberties of this country would never have been obtained’.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn8" id="ch13_fn8">8</a> It has been said that no ruling class ever abdicates of its own accord. Article 19 of the Covenant of the League of Nations remains a lonely monument to the pathetic fallacy that international grievances will be recognized as just and voluntarily remedied on the strength of ‘advice’ unanimously tendered by a body representative of world public opinion.</p>
<p class="para">While, however, the fundamental problem of political change – the compromise between power and morality – is identical in national and in international politics, the question of procedure is complicated by the unorganized character of the international community. Analogies drawn from procedures of change in the national sphere can only be applied with caution to the international field. We have seen that judicial procedures cannot be invoked, either nationally or internationally, for the solution of ultimate political problems. But the analogy of legislation seems at first sight more hopeful. The legislative process, unlike the judicial process, recognizes the role of power which is inherent in all political change (for the legislative authority is the supreme power of the state imposing its will on the whole community); and legislation, which a German writer has called ‘legal revolution’,<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn9" id="ch13_fn9">9</a> is the most obvious and regular way of bringing about political change within the state. ‘What is peaceful change as an effective institution of international law or of international society?’ asks Professor Lauterpacht, and answers: ‘It is the acceptance by states of a legal duty to acquiesce in changes in the law decreed by a competent international organ.’<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn10" id="ch13_fn10">10</a></p>
<p class="para">It has already been noted that international law rests upon custom, and that there is at the present time no such thing as international legislation or an international legislature. The terms of Article 19 of the Covenant show how remote the principal states were in 1919 from ‘acceptance of a legal duty to acquiesce in changes in the law decreed by a competent international organ’. Nor can this well be otherwise. Reflexion will show that the legislative process, like the judicial process, presupposes the existence of a political order. It is only by that combination of consent and coercion which underlies every political society that we can arrive at the establishment of a supreme organ, whether parliament or council of state or individual autocrat, whose fiat creates law binding on all members of the community. These conditions are not fulfilled in the international community. The Assembly of the League of Nations, whose decisions required unanimity, was a conference empowered to conclude international agreements, not a legislature which passed international legislation; for, as Mr Eden bluntly observed at one of its sessions, ‘it would plainly be impracticable…to give the Assembly power to impose changes against the wish of the parties concerned’.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn11" id="ch13_fn11">11</a> The difficulty lies not in the lack of machinery for international legislation, but in the absence of an international political order sufficiently well integrated to make possible <a id="page_194"></a>the establishment of a legislative authority whose decrees will be recognized as binding on states without their specific assent. If we accept Professor Lauterpacht’s identification of peaceful change with international legislation, we can only conclude that, in his words, ‘an international system of peaceful change…runs the risk of being unreal unless it forms part and parcel of a comprehensive political organization of mankind’.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn12" id="ch13_fn12">12</a> The condition of international legislation is the world super-state.</p>
<p class="para">Need we, however, reconcile ourselves to the discouraging conclusion that any international system of peaceful change must await the coming of the super-state? The analogy of legislation may turn out to be not merely discouraging, but misleading. The present almost universal belief in the beneficence of legislation as a reforming instrument within the state is in the main a growth of the past fifty years. Down to the end of the nineteenth century, many intelligent people continued to regard the state as a necessary evil and legislation as a regrettable device not to be resorted to except in case of proven necessity.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn13" id="ch13_fn13">13</a> Within the national community, the distinction familiar to nineteenth-century thought between ‘society’ and ‘state’ has lost much of its significance through the development of the social functions of the modern state. But in the international sphere, we are in the presence of a ‘society’ which has no corresponding ‘state’; and we may therefore find some help in the conception, which would hardly have seemed paradoxical to any age but our own, of changes peacefully effected in the social structure without legislation or any other overt form of state intervention. Even to-day, it is easy to exaggerate the role of legislation; and it may still be true to say (as it would certainly have been true a hundred years ago) that the most important changes in the structure of society and in the balance of forces within it are effected without legislative action. It may be unnecessarily pessimistic to rush into the conclusion that the absence of an international legislature rules out any international procedure of peaceful change.</p>
<p class="para">If, therefore, we are looking for the nearest analogy in the national community to the turbulent relations which render the problem of change acute in the international society, we may find it in the relations of those group-entities within the state whose conflicts have not been in the past, and still in large measure are not, settled by any legislative process. Of these group-entities, by far the most important, and by far the most instructive for our purpose, are those representing capital and labour respectively. Here we have the same recurrent conflict between ‘haves’ and ‘have-nots’, between ‘satisfied’ and ‘dissatisfied’; the same reluctance, on the part of one or both sides, to accept the principle of ‘all-in arbitration’ for the settlement of their disputes; the same recognition of the inapplicability or inadequacy of the legislative process; the same <a id="page_195"></a>appeals to ‘law and order’ by the satisfied group; and the same use, or threatened use, of violence by the <a id="page_196"></a>dissatisfied in order to assert their claims. It is sometimes said that there can be no international procedure of peaceful change so long as states insist on being judges in their own cause. Here is a class of disputes in which both parties commonly insist on being judges in their own cause, and in which some progress at least has been made towards an orderly procedure of peaceful change.</p>
<p class="para">Force has always been a crucial factor in relations between capital and labour. In the beginnings of the industrial revolution, every attempt at organized self-help on the part of the workers was rigorously repressed. This unqualified repression ended in Great Britain with the repeal of the Combination Acts in 1825, and continued in Russia as late as 1905. Between those two dates, the workers of every important industrial country secured recognition of their right to use the weapon of the organized strike. The strike not only proved itself an effective instrument for extracting concessions from employer to workers, but became a recognized symbol of the major weapon of force – revolution.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn14" id="ch13_fn14">14</a> In recent times, the element of force has been once more eliminated from relations between employer and workers by the authoritarian governments of Soviet Russia,<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn15" id="ch13_fn15">15</a> Italy and Germany, through legislation prohibiting strikes and an executive strong and ruthless enough to enforce the prohibition. Democratic countries have from time to time prohibited strikes, though such prohibitions have nearly always been resisted by the workers, and have rarely proved enforceable over an extended period.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn16" id="ch13_fn16">16</a> Theoretically, force might in the same way be eliminated from the settlement of international disputes by a powerful and authoritarian super-state. But this result, whether desirable or not, lies outside the scope of practical consideration; and we shall therefore find a better analogy to the international position if we consider those countries and those periods in which relations between capital and labour have not been dominated by the overwhelming power of the state. In the latter part of the nineteenth century and the first part of the twentieth the ‘have-nots’ of most countries steadily improved their position through a series of strikes and negotiations, and the ‘haves’, whether through a sense of justice, or through fear of revolution in the event of refusal, yielded ground rather than put the issue to the test of force. This process eventually produced on both sides a willingness to submit disputes to various forms of conciliation and arbitration, and ended by creating something like a regular system of ‘peaceful change’. In many countries such a system has been in operation for many years with remarkable success, though the ultimate right to resort to the weapon of the strike is not abandoned. If we could apply this analogy to international relations, we might hope that, once the dissatisfied Powers had realized the possibility of remedying grievances by peaceful negotiations (preceded no doubt in the first instance by threats of force), some regular procedure of ‘peaceful change’ might gradually be established and win the confidence of the dissatisfied; and that, once such a system had been recognized, conciliation would come to be regarded as a matter of course, and the threat of force, while never formally abandoned, recede further and further into the background. Whether the analogy is in fact valid, or whether this hope is purely utopian, is a question which can hardly be settled except by the test of experience. But one may record with some confidence the view that this is the only line of advance which affords any prospect at all of the establishment of any international procedure, however imperfect, of peaceful change.</p>
<p class="para">The implication of this procedure must, however, be clearly recognized. Few issues of social or political change of sufficient magnitude to involve the risk of revolution or war can be settled without detriment, or apparent detriment, to the interests of one of the parties. That the party at whose expense the change was to be effected would acquiesce in it without the existence of means of pressure to compel him to do so was one of the strange illusions of the ill-fated Article 19 of the Covenant; and this illusion may be discarded. Such self-abnegation could indeed hardly have been expected. The statesman, the trade union leader or the company director is a trustee for those whose interests he represents; and in order to justify extensive concessions at their expense, he must generally be in a position to plead that he has yielded to force majeure. When the change is effected by legislation, the compulsion is that of the state. But where the change is effected by the bargaining procedure, the force majeure can only be that of the stronger party. The employer who concedes the strikers’ demands pleads inability to resist. The trade union leader who calls off an unsuccessful strike pleads that the union was too weak to continue. ‘Yielding to threats of force’, which is sometimes used as a term of reproach, is therefore a normal part of the process.</p>
<p class="para">The parallel should not be pressed too far. The role of force, even in the most advanced democratic states, is indeed more constant and more conspicuous than most sentimental democrats care to admit. In so orderly a country as Great Britain, during the present century, force has been used or threatened for securing political ends by Ulstermen, Irish nationalists, female suffragists, communists, fascists and organized workers. But within the state there are checks on the too hasty resort to force. In the first place, the legislative process exists, and provides an alternative method of change; faith in the ballot-box has deterred the workers of many countries from revolutionary policies. Secondly, the state makes some show (often an imperfect one) of holding the balance impartially between the parties <a id="page_197"></a>on the issue in dispute. Thanks to these checks, a certain moral discredit attaches in democratic countries, in the minds of all classes, to the open use or threat of force until other means have been tried of bringing about a change.</p>
<p class="para">In international politics neither of these checks exists. The use or threatened use of force is therefore a normal and recognized method of bringing about important political change, and is regarded as morally discreditable mainly by those ‘conservative’ countries whose interests would suffer from change. The largest operation of ‘peaceful change’ in the nineteenth century was that performed by the Congress of Berlin, which revised the treaty imposed by Russia on Turkey at San Stefano. But this revision took place only under the tacit threat of a declaration of war against Russia by Great Britain and Austria-Hungary.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn17" id="ch13_fn17">17</a> The Lausanne Treaty of 1923 was a revision, extorted by the use and threatened use of force, of the treaty signed with Turkey at Sévres in 1920. It was denounced by Lloyd George as ‘an abject, cowardly and infamous surrender’; and this opinion was widely held at the time.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn18" id="ch13_fn18">18</a> The revision of Czecho-Slovakia’s frontiers effected by the Munich Agreement of September 1938 was also the product of a threat of force; and here we have the explicit testimony of M. Benes that no alternative method was available. For five years earlier he had publicly stated ‘that no country could be forced by anyone to revise its frontiers, and that anyone who attempted it in the case of Czecho-Slovakia would have to bring an army along’.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn19" id="ch13_fn19">19</a> Another curious example may be added. When Poland annexed Vilna in 1920, Lithuania closed the frontier and severed all communications with Poland. It is doubtful whether this isolation conferred any advantage on Lithuania. But no Lithuanian statesman could have justified the reopening of the frontier and the consequent loss of face to his country if he had not been in a position to plead <span class="italic">force majeure</span>. In March 1938, Poland mobilized an army and presented an ultimatum to Lithuania. The frontier was at once reopened; and normal relations were established. An operation of peaceful change, generally recognized as salutary, could not be effected save under a threat of war. Normally, the threat of war, tacit or overt, seems a necessary condition of important political changes in the international sphere.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn20" id="ch13_fn20">20</a></p>
<p class="para">This principle has not only been demonstrated in practice on many occasions, but received a large measure of theoretical recognition from the framers and interpreters of the Covenant of the League of Nations. The machinery of the League was brought into action by the danger of war. Article 11 related to ‘any war or threat of war’ and to ‘any circumstance…which threatens to disturb international peace’; and Article 19 purported to deal with treaties which have become inapplicable’ (a phrase which has never been satisfactorily explained) and with ‘international conditions <a id="page_198"></a>whose continuance might endanger the peace of the world’. Moreover, the most effective article of the Covenant for promoting peaceful change, and the only one which was ever invoked for the purpose,<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn21" id="ch13_fn21">21</a> was not Article 19 but Article 15, under which recommendations could be made without the concurrence of the parties concerned, and might, in the event of war, be supported by sanctions. But the only condition which could bring this article into operation was a ‘dispute likely to lead to a rupture’. The grievances of which the Covenant took cognizance were, broadly speaking, the grievances of states strong enough to create a danger of war. In 1932, when Finland brought before the Council a claim against Great Britain arising out of the commandeering of Finnish ships in the first world war, the British Government argued <span class="italic">inter alia</span> that there was no case to go to the Council, since the dispute was not in the least ‘likely to lead to a rupture’. In the same year, the British Government brought before the Council under Article 15 a dispute with Iran arising out of the affairs of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company. The essential difference was that Great Britain was strong enough to create the danger of a rupture, and Finland was not.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn22" id="ch13_fn22">22</a> When Article 19 was invoked for the first time by Bolivia in 1921, it was cogently argued that, since the conditions of which Bolivia complained had existed for a long period without endangering peace, there was no case for bringing them before the League. In other words, it would have been necessary, in order to set the procedure of peaceful change in motion, that Bolivia should be strong enough to threaten war against Chile. The doctrine of the Covenant thus confirmed the lesson of experience that peaceful change could not be effected on any important scale in international politics in the absence of a threat, or potential threat, of war.</p>
<p class="para">We may sum up the conclusions so far reached. The judicial process is unfitted to solve the problem of peaceful change in national, and a <span class="italic">fortiori</span> in international, politics; for, treating the parties to a dispute as equal, it fails to recognize the element of power which is a necessary factor in every demand for change. The legislative process, though recognizing the role of power and well adapted to meet many demands for change in national politics, is inapplicable to international demands for change, since it pre-supposes the existence of a legislative authority whose decrees are binding on all members of the community without their specific assent. There remains the bargaining process, which is applied to some demands for change within the state and is alone applicable to demands for international change, since states (like trade unions or employers’ federations) insist on the ultimate right to accept or reject any solution offered. But whereas under the legislative process change is enforced by the power of the state, change under the bargaining process can be enforced only by the power of the complainant. Power, used, threatened <a id="page_199"></a>or silently held in reserve, is an essential factor in international change; and change will, generally speaking, be effected only in the interests of those by whom, or on whose behalf, power can be invoked. ‘Yielding to threats of force’ is a normal part of the process of peaceful change.</p>
<p class="para">This is one side of the picture; and since it is the side which is ignored in most modern writing about international politics, it has been deliberately emphasized here. Nor should we underrate the value of peaceful change even considered solely from this point of view. If relations between employers and workers are such that the former cannot resist, or the latter cannot sustain, a demand for an increase in wages and a reduction in hours, it is preferable (quite apart from any question of the justice or injustice of the demand) that it should be conceded or rejected as the result of peaceful negotiations rather than as the result of a long and embittered strike which half ruins both employers and workers. If the relations of power between the leading European countries in 1877 made it inevitable that Bulgaria should be deprived of much of the territory allocated to her by the Treaty of San Stefano, then it was preferable that this result should be brought about by discussions round a table in Berlin rather than by a war between Great Britain and Austria-Hungary on the one side and Russia on the other. If we consider peaceful change merely as a more or less mechanical device, replacing the alternative device of war, for readjusting the distribution of territory and of other desirable things to changes in the equilibrium of political forces, it performs a function whose utility it would be hypocritical to deny. Many changes made in national communities, whether by legislation or otherwise, and recognized as salutary, have no other basis than this.</p>
<h3 id="ch13-head2">The role of morality in political change</h3>
<p class="NoIndent">Nevertheless, it is clear that there is another aspect of peaceful change which occupies men’s thoughts, and that it is no more possible to discuss peaceful change than to discuss any other kind of political procedure in terms of power alone. When a contested demand for change is made, the question which immediately exercises the minds of most people is whether it is just. It is true that our view of its justice is likely to be coloured, and may be wholly determined, by our own interest. It is true that, if our interest is not strongly engaged, we shall be tempted to discover reasons for regarding as just a solution which seems inevitable, or which could only be avoided by a great effort on our part. It is also true that, here as in every other political issue, power plays a part in determining our moral outlook, so that we shall be disposed, other things being equal, to regard a solution desired by the strong or the many as juster than a solution desired by the weak or <a id="page_200"></a>the few. But when all these allowances have been made, the view taken of the morality of the transaction – a view not wholly determined by considerations of power – will influence the attitude of the mass of people affected by it. ‘If orderly government is to command general assent,’ writes Mr Bertrand Russell, ‘some way must be found of persuading a majority of mankind to agree upon some doctrine other than that of Thrasymachus’;<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn23" id="ch13_fn23">23</a> and if an orderly procedure of peaceful change is ever to be established in international relations, some way must be found of basing its operation not on power alone, but on that uneasy compromise between power and morality which is the foundation of all political life. The establishment of a procedure of peaceful negotiation in disputes between capital and labour presupposes, not merely an acute perception on both sides of the strength and weakness of their respective positions at any given time, but also a certain measure of common feeling as to what is just and reasonable in their mutual relations, a spirit of give and take and even of potential self-sacrifice, so that a basis, however imperfect, exists for discussing demands on grounds of justice recognized by both. It is the embryonic character of this common feeling between nations, not the lack of a world legislature, and not the insistence of states on being judges in their own cause, which is the real obstacle in the way of an international procedure of peaceful change.</p>
<p class="para">How far is this common feeling operative in relation to demands for international change? Clearly in some degree. Two concrete cases of demands for change may be selected for analysis, one from the quasi-international, the other from the international sphere.</p>
<p class="para">In the nineteenth century, the demand for home rule for Ireland found among a large number of people in Great Britain a support based not on considerations of power, but on common recognition as a canon of international morality of the right of ‘oppressed nationalities’ to self-determination and on a certain readiness to sacrifice self-interest to it. The stock of common feeling between Great Britain and Ireland was considerably greater than that commonly existing between two foreign countries. Nevertheless, the demand for change did not become effective until, owing to the diversion of British military strength elsewhere, force could be placed behind it. If the compromise eventually arrived at in 1921 could have been achieved in 1916, it would have been a true example of peaceful change achieved, like most international examples of peaceful change, under threat of war. But even in 1921, the settlement could not have been reached, and above all could not have been lasting, solely on a basis of power. The Anglo-Irish Treaty was a flagrant case of ‘yielding to threats of force’: it was concluded with the authors of a successful rebellion. But it had its necessary moral foundation in the acceptance of a common standard of what was just and reasonable in mutual relations <a id="page_201"></a>between the two countries, and in the readiness of both (and particularly of the stronger) to make sacrifices in the interest of conciliation; and this made a striking success of an agreement about which the gloomiest prognostications were current at the time of its conclusion.</p>
<p class="para">The second example is the failure to achieve a peaceful settlement with Germany in the period between the two world wars. The mass of political opinion in Great Britain and Germany (and in most other countries) agreed for many years that a criterion of justice and injustice could properly be applied to the Versailles Treaty; and there was a surprisingly considerable, though far from complete, consensus of opinion about the parts of it which were just and unjust respectively. Unfortunately, Germany was almost wholly deficient for fifteen years after 1918 in that power which is, as we have seen, a necessary motive force in political change; and this deficiency prevented effect being given, except on a minor scale, to the widespread consensus of opinion that parts of the Versailles Treaty ought to be modified. By the time Germany regained her power, she had adopted a completely cynical attitude about the role of morality in international politics. Even though she continued to base her claims on grounds of justice, she expressed them more and more clearly in terms of naked force; and this reacted on the opinion of the <span class="italic">status quo</span> countries, which became more and more inclined to forget earlier admissions of the injustices of the Versailles Treaty and to consider the issue as exclusively one of power.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fnst" id="ch13_fnst">*</a> The easy acquiescence of the <span class="italic">status quo</span> Powers in such actions as the denunciation of the military clauses, the reoccupation of the Rhineland or the annexation of Austria was due, not wholly to the fact that it was the line of least resistance, but in part also to a consensus of opinion that these changes were in themselves reasonable and just.<a class="sup" href="#ch13-fn24" id="ch13_fn24">24</a> Yet they were greeted in each case by official censures and remonstrances which inevitably created the impression that the remonstrating Powers acquiesced merely because they were unable or unwilling to make the effort to resist. Successive removals of long recognized injustices of the Versailles Treaty became a cause not of reconciliation, but of further estrangement, between Germany and the Versailles Powers, and destroyed instead of increasing the limited stock of common feeling which had formerly existed.</p>
<p class="para">It is beyond the scope of the present book to discuss the present or future foreign policy of Great Britain or of any other state. But the defence of the <span class="italic">status quo</span> is not a policy which can be lastingly successful. It will end in war as surely as rigid conservatism will end in revolution. ‘Resistance to aggression’, however necessary as a momentary device of national policy, is no solution; for readiness to fight to prevent change is <a id="page_202"></a>just as unmoral as readiness to fight to enforce it. To establish methods of peaceful change is therefore the fundamental problem of international morality and of international politics. We can discard as purely utopian and muddle-headed plans for a procedure of peaceful change dictated by a world legislature or a world court. We can describe as utopian in the right sense (i.e. performing the proper function of a utopia in proclaiming an ideal to be aimed at, though not wholly attainable) the desire to eliminate the element of power and to base the bargaining process of peaceful change on a common feeling of what is just and reasonable. But we shall also keep in mind the realist view of peaceful change as an adjustment to the changed relations of power; and since the party which is able to bring most power to bear normally emerges successful from operations of peaceful change, we shall do our best to make ourselves as powerful as we can. In practice, we know that peaceful change can only be achieved through a compromise between the utopian conception of a common feeling of right and the realist conception of a mechanical adjustment to a changed equilibrium of forces. That is why a successful foreign policy must oscillate between the apparently opposite poles of force and appeasement.</p>
<h3 id="ch13-head3">Notes</h3>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fnst" id="ch13-fnst">*</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">This reaction was, of course, intensified by Nazi Germany’s domestic policy.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn1" id="ch13-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Burke, <span class="italic">Reflections on the Revolution in France</span> (Everyman ed.), p. 19.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn2" id="ch13-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Marx and Engels, <span class="italic">Works</span> (Russian ed.), ix, p. 372.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn3" id="ch13-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Gilbert Murray, <span class="italic">The League of Nations and the Democratic Idea</span>, p. 16.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn4" id="ch13-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. Russell, <span class="italic">Power</span>, p. 263.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn5" id="ch13-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. Strachey, <span class="italic">The Menace of Fascism</span>, p. 228.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn6" id="ch13-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in J. Truslow Adams, <span class="italic">The Epic of America</span>, p. 239.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn7" id="ch13-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 708.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn8" id="ch13-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in E. Pethick-Lawrence, <span class="italic">My Part in a Changing World</span>, p. 269.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn9" id="ch13-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Berber, <span class="italic">Sicherheit und Gerechtigkeit</span>, p. 9.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn10" id="ch13-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Peaceful Change</span>, ed. C. A. W. Manning, p. 141.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn11" id="ch13-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Seventeenth Assembly</span>, p. 46.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn12" id="ch13-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Peaceful Change</span>, ed. C. A. W. Manning, p. 164.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn13" id="ch13-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Professor Lauterpacht’s remark that ‘the circle of interests directly regulated by law expands with the growth of civilization’ (<span class="italic">The Function of Law in the International Community</span>, p. 392) is a truism to-day, but would have seemed a paradox to many nineteenth-century thinkers.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn14" id="ch13-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">This is the significance of the ‘one-day strike’, which was popular in certain countries and which, though useless in itself, was designed to demonstrate that the workers were strong enough to break the power of the state. The success or failure of the one-day strike was thus a test of power, and its result enabled both sides to draw the appropriate conclusion without resorting to extreme measures.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn15" id="ch13-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The position is not substantially affected by the fact that in Soviet Russia the employer is normally a state trust or institution.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_203"></a><a href="#ch13_fn16" id="ch13-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In Great Britain, strikes in munitions factories were prohibited during the first world war by the Munitions of War Acts. But though strikes occurred, the law was rarely if ever enforced, and it came to an end with the War. Under the Trade Disputes Act of 1927, political strikes were declared illegal, but no such case appears to have arisen since the act was passed. The situation in other countries is summarized in a pamphlet published by the American League for Industrial Democracy (<span class="italic">Shall Strikes be Outlawed?</span> by Joel Seidman), which concludes that ‘labour feels that its right to strike is its surest guarantee of fair treatment’ and that ‘along the path of voluntary collective bargaining lies the greatest hope of satisfactory industrial relations’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn17" id="ch13-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">A writer who has surveyed the history of peaceful change down to 1914 records the conclusion that ‘it is always wisest to face Europe with a <span class="italic">fait accompli’</span> (Cruttwell, <span class="italic">History of Peaceful Change</span>, p. 3).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn18" id="ch13-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">D. Lloyd George, <span class="italic">The Truth About the Peace Treaties</span>, ii. p. 1351.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn19" id="ch13-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 26 April 1933, quoted by Professor Manning in Politica, December 1938, p. 363.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn20" id="ch13-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Those who assert that change effected under a threat of armed force is not ‘peaceful change’ are, of course, at liberty to define their terms how they please. But it should be noted that a definition thus restricted would equally exclude changes effected by a legislative or judicial process, if these required enforcement. If Czecho-Slovak territory had been transferred to Germany in September 1938 by a decision of the League Assembly or of an equity tribunal, enforced by mobilizing the armies of the League or an international police force, the change would not for that reason have had any better title to the epithet ‘peaceful’. Armed force would have been used in precisely the same way.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn21" id="ch13-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The Special Assembly, dealing with the Manchurian dispute under Article 15 of the Covenant, endorsed the recommendations of the Lytton Commission for substantial modifications of the <span class="italic">status quo</span> in Manchuria. It need hardly be added that Japanese military action was the force which prompted these recommendations, which proved, however, insufficient to satisfy Japan.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn22" id="ch13-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In the Finnish question, M. Madariaga expressed the view that ‘it was extremely dangerous for the Council, the Assembly, and the League of Nations to establish the doctrine that irascible parties would be listened to, and calm parties would not, because in the latter case there would be no question of a rupture’ (<span class="italic">League of Nations: Official Journal</span>, November 1934, p. 1458). The defect of the Finnish case was, however, not so much that Finland was calm as that she was weak.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn23" id="ch13-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. Russell, <span class="italic">Power,</span> p. 100.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><a id="page_204"></a><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch13_fn24" id="ch13-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In Great Britain, a perusal of the British press for 7 and 8 March 1936 will show how widely the reoccupation of the Rhineland was not merely tolerated, but welcomed. Subsequently, the tone of the press became less favourable, being manifestly influenced by the more critical official attitude.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>