<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Global Architecture of Multilateral Development Banks</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <h1 class="halftitle">The Global Architecture of Multilateral Development Banks</h1>

    <div class="item">
      This book explores the evolution of the 30 functioning multilateral development banks (MDBs). MDBs have their
      roots in the growing system of international finance and multilateral cooperation, with the first recognisable
      MDB being proposed by Latin America in financial cooperation with the US in the late 1930s. That Inter-American
      Bank did not eventuate but was a precursor to the World Bank being negotiated at Bretton Woods in 1944. Since
      then, a complex network of regional, sub-regional, and specialised development banks has progressively emerged
      across the globe, including two significant recent entrants established by China and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      MDBs arrange loans, credits, and guarantees for investment in member states, generally with the stated aim of
      fostering economic growth. They operate in both the Global North and South, though there are more MDBs focussing
      on emerging and developing states. While the World Bank and some of the larger regional banks have been
      scrutinised, little attention has been paid to the smaller banks or the overall system. This book provides the
      first study of all 30 MDBs and it evaluates their interrelationships. It analyses the emergence of the MDBs in
      relation to geopolitics, development paradigms, and debt. It includes sections on each of the banks as well as on
      how MDBs have approached the key sectors of infrastructure, human development, and climate.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      This book will be of particular interest to researchers of development finance, global governance, and
      international political economy.
    </div>

    <div class="noindent">
      <strong class="calibre2">Adrian Robert Bazbauers</strong> is a Lecturer in International Public Sector Management, School of
      Business, UNSW Canberra, Australia.
    </div>

    <div class="noindent">
      <strong class="calibre2">Susan Engel</strong> is an Associate Professor in Politics and International Studies, University of
      Wollongong, Australia.
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
