<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Global Architecture of Multilateral Development Banks</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <div class="copyt">
      First published 2021
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      by Routledge
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      and by Routledge
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      © 2021 Adrian Robert Bazbauers and Susan Engel
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      <em class="calibre4">Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor &amp; Francis Group, an informa business</em>
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      The right of Adrian Robert Bazbauers and Susan Engel to be identified as authors of this work has been asserted
      by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any
      electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or
      in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      <em class="calibre4">Trademark notice</em>: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used
      only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      <em class="calibre4">British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data</em>
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      <em class="calibre4">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</em>
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      Names: Bazbauers, Adrian Robert, author. | Engel, Susan N., author.
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      Title: The global architecture of multilateral development banks : a system of debt or development? / Adrian
      Robert Bazbauers and Susan Engel.
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      Description: Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY : Routledge, 2021. |
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      Series: Routledge explorations in development studies | Includes bibliographical references and index.
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      Identifiers: LCCN 2020042575 (print) | LCCN 2020042576 (ebook) |
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      ISBN 9780367440244 (hardback) | ISBN 9781003007128 (ebook)
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      Subjects: LCSH: Development banks. | International finance.
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      Classification: LCC HG1975 .B39 2021 (print) |
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      LCC HG1975 (ebook) | DDC 332.1/53—dc23
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      LC record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov" class="item2">https://lccn.loc.gov/2020042575</a>
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      LC ebook record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov" class="item2">https://lccn.loc.gov/2020042576</a>
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      ISBN: 978-0-367-44024-4 (hbk)
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      ISBN: 978-1-003-00712-8 (ebk)
    </div>

    <div class="copya">
      Typeset in Goudy
    </div>

    <div class="copy">
      by codeMantra
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
