<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Global Architecture of Multilateral Development Banks</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<div class="calibre1">
<h1 class="toc"><a href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter9" class="item2">9 Infrastructure</a></h1>

    <div class="item">
      Infrastructure is a broad sector. The World Bank (1994) says the sector incorporates power, telecommunications,
      water supply, sanitation and sewerage, solid waste, roads, railways, ports, airports, and major dams and canals.
      It is undoubtedly vital to development. Roads give people access not just to markets but to education and health
      care, water and sanitation are central to extending longevity, and energy and telecommunications are human
      rights. Infrastructure was the original focus of the multilateral development banks (MDBs) and retroliberalism
      has seen it return to the centre of the development agenda, aided by Chinese interests, international investors,
      and extravagant estimates of the value of infrastructure needs proposed by the MDBs. The <a class="item2"></a>Brookings Institute claimed that from 2016 to 2030 $90 trillion will be needed for infrastructure and
      the World Bank has adopted this estimate (Ahmad and Alawode 2017). In Asia, over the same period, the Asian
      Development Bank (<abbr>AsDB</abbr>) said that developing countries will need $26 trillion (Ahmad and Alawode
      2017).
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      Infrastructure investment is written into the DNA of the MDBs. Only three of the 30 MDBs operating today do not
      make it a priority – the Council of Europe Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CEB</abbr>),
      International Bank for Economic Cooperation (<a class="item2"></a>IBEC), and International Fund for Agricultural
      Development (<a class="item2"></a>IFAD). Infrastructure was a key focus during the 1950s and 1960s, although
      allocations declined in the crisis years of the 1970s as the focus on basic needs increased and declined further
      in the 1980s due to the hostility of the Washington Consensus to state investment. Attention returned from the
      late 1990s and today it is at the centre of development practice. Engen and Prizzon’s (2018, 41) study of 22 MDBs
      found that for most of them ‘infrastructure is the largest sector’ and that 12 of them ‘allocate more than 50% of
      their disbursements to infrastructure development,’ with transportation and energy being the two largest sectors.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      <a class="item2"></a>Neoliberalism’s focus on limiting the size of governments has not disappeared and, as a
      consequence, the MDBs now define infrastructure as a problem arising from a lack of private finance (Ray 2015).
      Hence, the MDBs shifted from privatisation to public-private partnerships (<a class="item2"></a>PPPs) to
      de-risking infrastructure as an asset class, which is argued to multiply billions in <a class="item2"></a>investment into trillions (Gabor 2018). This has resulted in the MDBs doubling down in their efforts
      to develop innovative new financial instruments that expand private sector engagement in infrastructure to every
      corner of government operation. Still, private capital is hesitant to engage with the poorest states and in a
      range of sectors. Further, as infrastructure, it involves a high level of risk. There are environmental, social,
      political, and economic risks and a long history of poor planning and construction, particularly for large-scale,
      complex projects, which are back in fashion.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      This chapter begins by explaining why infrastructure lending is a core business of the MDBs and equally why it is
      a risk-laden sector. The second section of the chapter outlines the history of MDB engagement with infrastructure
      and the third section explores the eruption of complex financial instruments in the context of rapidly expanding
      global debt. All in all, it is hard not to worry that the current boom in infrastructure investment may end with
      a bang.
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">9.1 Infrastructure: a <a class="item6"></a>core but high-risk business</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Infrastructure lending was well suited to both the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development’s
        (IBRD) structure and its early staffers concept of the Bank. The IBRD, like most MDBs, predominantly lends to
        nation states and its founding documents stipulated that loans must be mostly for specific projects and must
        have been evaluated and recommended by a ‘competent committee.’ Further, most MDBs have clauses in their
        founding agreements that they can only loan funds where they cannot be procured on market terms; in other
        words, they are meant to generate additionality for borrowers (Ryan-Collins and Spratt 2013). In addition, as
        <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a> outlined, the MDBs are reliant on finance markets and credit rating agencies and
        so they need projects that bankers find acceptable. Infrastructure meets this brief perfectly; it involves
        specific projects that produce, on paper at least, the rates of return that finance markets want to see.
        Projects need to be substantial enough to warrant a good deal of technical expertise and study and still
        produce a scale of loan that is useful for a multilateral bank with a lending imperative; historically, the
        average World Bank loan size was around $100 million (Ranis 1997, 86). Moreover, the scale, risk, and
        timeframes of infrastructure investments mean that, all too often, private capital is not willing to lend,
        which is exactly why the MDBs were created. And, lastly, from the perspective of bankers, economists, and the
        <a class="item2"></a>IBRD’s neoclassical growth model, infrastructure is the key driver of private sector
        growth.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Still, the scale of infrastructure projects means that they are often high-risk investments. As Flyvbjerg,
        Garbuio, and Lovallo (2009, 171–2) note,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          across the globe, large infrastructure projects almost invariably arrive late, over-budget and, and fail to
          perform up to expectations. Cost overruns and benefits shortfalls of 50 percent are common; cost overruns
          above 100 percent are not uncommon.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Given that the MDBs are not meant to fund commercially viable projects that can be financed by private capital,
        they are likely to be funding the riskiest infrastructure projects, though it is not always the case that they
        do. Delving deeper into the source of risk highlights that large infrastructure projects have long lead times,
        a high degree of complexity and sometimes a lack of clarity, technology is often uncertain, and geology,
        climate, and other issues create unforeseen and unbudgeted obstacles (Flyvbjerg 2009). In developing countries
        following the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War, there was an acute shortage of skilled personnel,
        especially engineers, and, as a consequence, complex infrastructure projects created an over-dependence on
        foreign skills and dependent development (Mold 2012, Sogge, Biekart, and Saxby 1996).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Infrastructure <a class="item2"></a>demand forecasts also tend to be dramatically wrong (Flyvbjerg 2009).
        Flyvbjerg, Garbuio, and Lovallo (2009, 172) argue that problematic forecasts do not just arise from delusions
        or genuine mistakes and bad luck but that ‘deception’ and the ‘strategic manipulation of information’ also play
        a role. This is because there are vested interests involved: politicians and policymakers who want to be seen
        leading projects of benefit to their communities, contractors and developers who stand to gain multimillion
        dollar contracts, not to mention the agendas of landowners, lawyers, financiers, and a host of others. For
        contractors, once they have won a contract, they can often renegotiate it to reflect ‘unanticipated’ costs and
        governments too often are left with all the risk and the private sector with the gains (Alston 2018).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        All of this can influence the <a class="item2"></a>planning process and not everyone has the same level of
        information about the likely costs and benefits of proposals. In New Institutional Economics terms, there is
        asymmetric information. The long-term time horizon can serve to dampen risk concerns, such as for the
        politicians who leave office before a project is completed. The multiple parties involved mean it is often
        difficult to hold any one person or group to account for failures or cost overruns (Flyvbjerg, Garbuio, and
        Lovallo 2009). When investments are funded by MDBs, that adds yet another set of interests to be accounted for.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Projects in the Global South tend to have higher levels of corruption than those in the North. This meant that
        the infrastructure boom of the 1950s to 1970s produced many so-called <a class="item2"></a>‘white elephants’ –
        status projects like highways to nowhere, dams that quickly silted up, poor quality roads that became
        impassable, and so on. The World Bank and other MDBs only finally admitted that corruption was an issue in the
        late 1990s but even then, they only focussed on corruption by government officials. They paid insufficient
        attention to reducing corruption in large-scale infrastructure projects and the (often Northern) ‘corporations
        who supply the bribes’ (Hostetler 2011, 235). The standard MDB refrain to such critiques is <em class="calibre4">that was in the
        past, things have changed now</em>, but recent examples are easy enough to find, for example, the International
        Finance Corporation (IFC) was implicated in a corruption scandal impacting a 2019 Colombian highway project
        (Goodman 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        MDB infrastructure projects have often negatively affected communities, including: ‘loss of livelihoods; spread
        of communicable diseases; expansion of the production and trafficking of illicit goods; community conflicts;
        loss of life through dam collapses and construction accidents; and forced displacement and resettlement’ (Sims
        2020, 153). This happens despite the safeguard policies that most large MDBs have established because they are
        difficult to enforce. Further, gender policies tend not to be considered in the planning and implementation of
        <a class="item2"></a>World Bank infrastructure projects (Ferguson and Harman 2015). When infrastructure
        projects are privatised, the poor are unlikely to benefit because the private providers are interested in
        reducing costs and charging high user fees, which the poor can rarely afford, and thus they sometimes end up
        excluded from services (Alston 2018). In the case of the expensive and grossly under-funded area of sanitation,
        the World Bank – rather than help subsidise latrine construction costs – chose to use active shaming of the
        poor to trigger personal latrine construction. This approach is widely supported because its anti-subsidy model
        fits with neoliberalism’s hostility to the state, but the programmes infringe human rights and mimic derogatory
        colonial programmes (Engel and Susilo 2014), while deliberate shaming harms the psychosocial well-being of the
        poor (Bateman and Engel 2018).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Large projects may offer sizeable economic benefits, but their environmental costs can be equally substantial.
        The <a class="item2"></a>Polonoroeste highway project outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 10</a> and the
        resultant mass deforestation of the Amazon is one of the better known examples (Rich 1994). Sims (2020, 153)
        offers this summary of the environmental impacts of recently funded MDB infrastructure investments: ‘clearance
        of protected forest lands; increased pollutive outputs of expanding industries; species loss through habitat
        fragmentation, poaching, and vehicle-wildlife collisions; deterioration of riverine ecosystems including
        fisheries loss through hydropower development.’ These concerns do not just relate to the World Bank but to the
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (<abbr>AIIB</abbr>), and other MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a>Maintenance of infrastructure has also been a huge challenge often exacerbated by
        infrastructure inappropriate for the economic or environmental conditions of a region (Mold 2012). The World
        Bank acknowledged the lack of attention to this challenge in documents published in the 1980s (Mold 2012). In
        the Pacific Islands, this situation is still so endemic that the <a class="item2"></a>Pacific Regional
        Infrastructure Facility (2013) contends that donors operate a build-neglect-rebuild paradigm, which is a
        reference to the PPP strategy of build-operate-transfer.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">9.2 The <a class="item6"></a>evolution of MDB lending in infrastructure</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Infrastructure did not just suit the structure of the MDBs, it was a core part of their initial Keynesian,
        welfare, modernisation model. Modernisation and Growth Theory both situated expanding capital formation as key
        to accelerating economic growth. Paul Rosenstein-Rodan’s (1961) argument that capital produces increasing
        returns to scale thanks to the benefits of scale that accrue from development and that a ‘big push’ in
        infrastructure investment is needed to achieve this was particularly influential (Mold 2012). This was the
        World Bank’s goal between the 1950s and 1970s. In the 1950s, infrastructure lending was 63% of total IBRD
        lending commitments and rose to a peak of 81% in the 1960s (World Bank 1994). The Bank at this time established
        the model that infrastructure and other projects must be tendered out to the market. Only on rare occasions
        does the Bank allow the use of a force account; that is, allowing governments to do the construction work
        themselves. This model was meant to ensure the most efficient use of Bank funds. Bank lending for
        infrastructure remained at a high 63% in the 1970s, even as it became interested in basic needs. Official flows
        were overrun by private finance in the 1970s, particularly re-invested petrodollars. These were the
        infrastructure boom decades, but they ended in a bust with project failures and poor maintenance on the one
        hand and general crisis in many developing countries on the other hand, caused by rising oil costs, decreasing
        prices for primary commodities, and general economic malaise.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Infrastructure <a class="item2"></a>investment declined rapidly with the rise of the Washington Consensus;
        structural adjustment lending came to total 43% of World Bank lending in the 1980s (World Bank 1994). This is
        not surprising, given that a key part of the neoliberal critique of statist development was that it focussed
        too much on the formation of physical capital, at the expense of ‘human capital’ (Toye 1993). Equally,
        <a class="item2"></a>neoliberalism in the 1980s was focussed on privatising state assets rather than
        constructing new ones, starting with those that operated in market sectors and then extending into natural
        monopolies or public utilities such as telecommunications, electricity, gas, water, and even sewerage, though
        this rarely proved profitable enough for privatisation.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        By the late 1980s, some of the social and environmental costs of World Bank-funded infrastructure projects were
        becoming public, with civil society movements highlighting failures. This was another reason that
        infrastructure investments declined further in the early 1990s to just under 34% of lending commitments. The
        Bank responded with the development of a range of safeguard policies and – as outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a> – other MDBs followed suit. Not all MDBs abandoned infrastructure, however. It remained a
        key focus for the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB); the Islamic MDB regards the sector as a key strength. IsDB
        Group (2016, 19) claims to prioritise more than ‘most peer MDBs’ and remarks that almost 80% of financial
        allocations ‘are in infrastructure sectors – energy, water, transport, and telecommunication.’ Infrastructure
        is a safe space for an MDB reliant on fossil fuel rents and working with conservative religious regimes (Engel
        and Bazbauers 2020). In Latin America, the Development Bank of Latin America (<abbr>CAF</abbr>) started to turn
        away from short-term credit for trade towards infrastructure from the early 1990s; from this time, it doubled
        its infrastructure commitments roughly every five years (<abbr>CAF</abbr> 2000, 2005). The <abbr>CAF</abbr> has
        consistently supported regional development with a focus on transport and energy projects.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> never abandoned infrastructure either. It is one of the most ‘traditional’ MDBs in that
        it lends as much as 80% of its funds for infrastructure (Park 2015, 456). Indeed, it has been known in the
        region as ‘Asian Dams and Bridges.’ It only created an accountability mechanism in 1995 largely thanks to US
        pressure and it managed to escape detailed scrutiny of the negative environmental and social impacts of most of
        its projects until 2000 when civil society groups made a major push for safeguard policies. In the late 1990s,
        the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> acted as a broker for regional initiatives in Southeast Asia with a strong focus on
        infrastructure, including the <a class="item2"></a>Greater Mekong Sub-Region (GMS) initiative. As Sims (2020,
        149) argues, this is one of the ways that the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> ‘has sought to establish normative views on
        development’ and it represents ‘transnational (primarily infrastructure) connectivity as constitutive of
        development.’ Still, these projects resulted in negative attention for the Asian MDB thanks to their
        environmental and livelihood costs (Sims 2015).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        By the late 1980s and into the 1990s, the market was simply not supplying major infrastructure projects, as
        neoliberals had said it would. This is because, as Mold (2012, 246) comments at length, in
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          many developing countries, the size of the market was too small to justify large-scale private participation
          in sectors such as the energy sector, and technological advances to provide a ‘reasonable’ minimum efficient
          scale of production were not forthcoming either. As a result, private investment in crucial sectors such as
          was rarely forthcoming on the anticipated scale.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        With the 1980s <a class="item2"></a>debt crisis, infrastructure investment was often one of the first areas
        sacrificed by the state. Thus, investment fell below what was needed even to sustain existing infrastructure in
        some parts of the world, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        But, in the late 1990s, the tide started to turn for infrastructure. The <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s vocal support
        helped, though China’s strong practical interest in and backing for the sector was even more important. In
        Latin America, neo-structuralism refocussed interest on infrastructure. There were quite a few <a class="item2"></a>regional infrastructure initiatives around the world and a number of these were centred on the
        MDBs, though some were initiatives of regional powers with leadership aspirations (Palestini 2016). Examples
        include the African Union’s 2001 New Partnership for African Development and its associated Infrastructure
        Project Facility managed by the African Development Bank (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>) as well as the 2000 Initiative for
        the Integration of Regional Infrastructure of South America, proposed by Brazil but coordinated by the
        Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and <abbr>CAF</abbr> with FONPLATA Development Bank and the Central
        American Bank for Economic Integration (<abbr>CABEI</abbr>) later involved (Palestini 2016). In addition, the
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and <abbr>ASEAN</abbr> established the <abbr>ASEAN</abbr> Infrastructure Fund (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>AIF</abbr>) in 2012 to address infrastructure needs by mobilising regional savings and, of
        course, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> was launched in 2015 to improve infrastructure connectivity in Asia.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a><a class="item2"></a>Chinese development finance was a major driver of the infrastructure
        push in the 2000s. This was almost certainly a way of helping domestic Chinese firms deploy their surplus
        capacity. The largest Chinese public development banks are the China Development Bank and China Export-Import
        Bank (<abbr>CHEXIM</abbr>). By 2015, these two banks lent more in Latin America than the combined funds of the
        World Bank, IADB, and <abbr>CAF</abbr> (Palestini 2016) and they were major supporters of infrastructure in
        Africa too. The China Development Bank is the larger of the two and it mainly provides non-concessional loans
        for infrastructure and energy projects, while <abbr>CHEXIM</abbr> loans are concessional. <abbr>CHEXIM</abbr>
        and the IADB established a joint investment platform in 2012 focussing ‘on infrastructure, mining, and energy
        projects’ (Palestini 2016, 26). The Chinese interest in infrastructure also reflects their competitiveness in
        the sector, which has translated into winning contracts to implement MDB loans. In the early 1990s, firms from
        the US, Germany, Japan, France, and the UK won 50.5% of World Bank derivative procurement work and 96.8% of the
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and – with Italy – 96.5% of the IADB, although only 25% of <abbr>AfDB</abbr> Group contracts
        (Bracking 2009, 117). By 2002, however, China and India topped the list of suppliers for civil works contracts
        and China was also the number one supplier in goods contracts (Bracking 2009, 123).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In the 2000s, infrastructure became a cornerstone of the emerging <a class="item2"></a>retroliberal development
        agenda. The first step was viewing public investment in infrastructure as increasing the productivity of
        private investment, meaning the two were deemed complementary (Mold 2012). Next, plans for how infrastructure
        might be financialised by becoming an asset class made it a key part of the World Bank’s Maximising Finance for
        Development (MFD) agenda. The rapid and multifaceted innovation in infrastructure contracting and
        financialisation is outlined in the next section of this chapter.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Interestingly, however, World Bank infrastructure lending commitments have not skyrocketed, though they have
        gone up. In the second half of the 2000s, infrastructure increased to 38% of lending commitments and in the
        second half of the 2010s they reached just over 40% (World Bank 2010, 2019). The <abbr>CAF</abbr> continued to
        expand its focus on infrastructure, with its cumulative loan portfolio as of March 2015 ranking transport in
        first place with 36% of approvals, followed by the energy sector in second place with 28% (<abbr>CAF</abbr>
        2015). In the IsDB, the infrastructure sector accounted for 59% of OCR flows in 2018, a slight decline from
        2010 to 2014 when it was 60.6% (Aid Flows 2019). Notably, the IsDB’s 2018 Annual Report emphasised the
        importance of infrastructure contracts using neoliberal frameworks promoted by the World Bank like PPPs (IsDB
        2018). Similarly, the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank (<abbr>BSTDB</abbr>), while largely focussing on
        private sector and trade lending, is shifting towards lending to governments for infrastructure as part of the
        2019–22 Strategy (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>BSTDB</abbr> 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In Asia, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> highlighted the region’s infrastructure needs with its 2009 flagship report:
        Infrastructure for a Seamless Asia. The report estimates a large infrastructure gap and provides the standard
        case that closing this would improve efficiency and market access (O’Keeffe, Pryke, and Wurf 2017). It also
        notes that infrastructure financing ‘is complicated because national governments are reluctant to finance
        infrastructure investment through foreign borrowing, while most of Asia’s domestic savings are not at the
        disposal of national governments’ (O’Keeffe, Pryke, and Wurf 2017, 36). Perhaps unwittingly, then, they
        provided part of the justification for China to create a new MDB focussed on infrastructure. Further,
        infrastructure is a priority of the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s Strategy 2030 and it has taken a leaf out of the MFD
        playbook with a strong focus on leveraging bank resources to expand financing (<abbr>AsDB</abbr> 2018). On
        PPPs, the Asian MDB has even developed an operational framework to expand their use (Abon and Chiplunkar 2013).
        The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> has also devoted considerable amounts of technical assistance to infrastructure projects.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, with its infrastructure-focussed mandate, has targeted a lending programme of $10–$15
        billion annually, however it only reached $3.3 billion in loan commitments in 2018 and $4.5 billion in 2019.
        Most MDBs have taken some time to build their portfolio and, as outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 3</a>,
        developing a project pipeline is difficult. Further, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> focusses on the complex realm of
        infrastructure, making the situation more difficult. To achieve its current level of commitments, it has
        pursued a fair amount of co-financing and funding for financial intermediaries has increased significantly –
        more on this below.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Infrastructure is likely to remain a priority for the MDBs for the foreseeable future. It is a key focus of the
        MDBs and Chinese development finance, and the <a class="item2"></a>COVID-19 pandemic has led to the
        fast-tracking of infrastructure investments. There is legitimacy to the concern that the proliferation of
        bilateral and multilateral development finance programmes is causing inefficiencies and resource overlap. But
        the rapid build-up of infrastructure financing and the increasing financialisation of the sector are the
        reasons we ask, as Mold (2012) did, whether the infrastructure boom is again going to end in tears. To answer
        this question, a look at the contractual and <a class="item2"></a>financial innovations changing the sector is
        vital.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">9.3 Financial innovation in infrastructure: the journey from competitive tendering to
      de-risking infrastructure as an asset class</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The World Bank’s Articles of Agreement have a range of clauses about the effective use of funds, but they did
        not originally specify international competitive bidding (ICB) for procurement. This was introduced in 1951
        and, according to Mason and Asher (1973, 187), was ‘one of the Bank’s proudest moments.’ ICB is not without its
        challenges, however. There are questions around the weighting for domestic procurement, the specifications for
        goods and services, the engagement of consultants in appraisal work that are also interested in providing
        inputs at the project stage, and more. In terms of consultants, today they frequently circumvent the Bank’s
        prohibition by creating different consortiums for the appraisal and implementation stages of projects. Indeed,
        this is one reason why some of the supposed benefits of ICB have been overstated. Further, in major projects,
        there are generally only a handful of firms able to undertake the work, thus the bidding is often not as
        competitive as is made out. As noted above, this has resulted in a handful of Global North countries being the
        major beneficiaries of World Bank and other MDB work, with China and India now joining that group. In Africa,
        outside of the telecommunications sector, almost no African firms win major infrastructure projects (Mold
        2012).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In the 1980s, the attention of the MDBs turned to <a class="item2"></a>corporatisation and privatisation of
        existing infrastructure projects. This often involved splitting firms or utilities into their component parts
        and privatising the most profitable parts, while corporatising the remainder with the view that one day it too
        would be privatised. In the case of electricity, for example, this means splitting services into three parts:
        generation, distribution, and supply. First, independent power providers are introduced into generation as a
        lead into privatising this component. Next, supply is privatised. Then, lastly, distribution is privatised as
        it is hard to make the poles and wires profitable on their own (Bayliss and Hall 2002, Yi-chong 2005). Still,
        it takes a lot of regulation and monitoring to create ‘markets’ in electricity as it is still largely a natural
        monopoly and the privatised sector has seen many scandals and market failures (Beder 2003). One illustration of
        the way that private capital is still being inserted into <a class="item2"></a>electricity markets is a 2018
        project financed by the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and IsDB supporting an independent gas power producer in Bhola,
        Bangladesh. The project was unsolicited and approved by the government without any open bidding, with the MDBs
        nevertheless providing finance; it demonstrates how the ideology of privatisation and neoliberalism take
        precedence over basic competitive practices. The project has also been subject to very critical reports by the
        NGO Forum on the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> for its impacts on the local environment and livelihoods.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AIIB</abbr>-IsDB project is what is called a build-own-operate model, but the growth of PPPs has led
        to the use of multiple modalities in MDB financing. As Abon and Chiplunkar (2013, 12) outline, the PPP
        modalities
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          range from build-operate-transfer, build-own-operate-transfer, concession, private independent power
          producers, joint ventures, service contracts, build–own–operate, design–build–finance–operate, financing
          facility, and purely private sector investments such as direct loans to and equity investments in private
          organizations.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        For infrastructure projects, it is common to see a special purpose vehicle (SPV) company created for the
        project that private investors and the government have equity shares in, with governments providing a capital
        subsidy through a range of possible mechanisms. Governments often guarantee tax breaks and revenues to the
        <a class="item2"></a>SPV, effectively de-risking it for private and institutional investors. Alston (2018)
        notes that this kind of privatisation of infrastructure has dramatically change the relationship between people
        and their governments and questions whether these arrangements can protect human rights in the face of the
        profit motive and corporate secrecy.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The World Bank’s MFD agenda targets infrastructure and aims to turn it into an asset class. As Gabor (2018)
        argues, both the Bank and the G20 are focussed on de-risking projects, particularly infrastructure for private
        capital, and Gabor’s parallel to David Harvey’s accumulation by dispossession in the term accumulation by
        re-risking is apt. What we could add to Gabor’s analysis, is that the traditional MDB approach of borrowing on
        bond markets to fund infrastructure that states would guarantee to repay, is also a way of de-risking private
        finance invested in MDBs. Still, extending de-risking to the asset and privatising its ownership extends the
        reach and power of private capital and interests over public ones in profound ways. The irony of the World
        Bank’s approach to harnessing private finance in innovative ways is that the Bank was precisely meant to be an
        alternative to the dangers and violence of private capital. Instead, the Bank is expanding that influence.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        States caught in the straitjacket of independent central banks and small government budgets are almost forced
        into <a class="item2"></a>privatisation and PPPs, assisted by the fact that accountancy rules mean PPPs can be
        excluded from public debt. Yet, PPPs are very often more expensive than traditional public investment though
        they are presented to citizens as more competitive (Alston 2018, Bayliss and Van Waeyenberge 2018) and their
        social outcomes are not satisfactory despite the multitude of safeguard policies that MDBs require (Alston
        2018). The renewal of the austerity agenda following the 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GCF) saw a further
        growth in privatisation as a way of paying down state debt, which was created by bailing out private banks and
        businesses. PPPs are also being driven by the masses of surplus capital floating around the world looking for
        safe and profitable investments; investors are demanding states create these vehicles.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AIIB</abbr>’s loans offer insights into the financialisation of infrastructure. Loans to financial
        intermediaries went from 15.4% of <abbr>AIIB</abbr> loan commitments in 2017 to 24.6% in 2018 and 28.8% in
        2019. Of the 28 loan commitments in 2019, there were at least five PPPs and a further 15 loans to ‘innovative’
        financial instruments including: financial intermediaries, private equity firms, climate bond portfolios,
        managed portfolios and the IFC’s Emerging Asia Fund. One of the equity investments is in CITIC Capital’s Pan
        Eurasian Fund. CITIC Capital calls itself an ‘alternative investment management and advisory company’ and its
        largest owner is CITIC Group, which is China’s largest state-owned conglomerate and investment company. In
        other words, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is borrowing on bond markets to fund a Chinese state-backed private equity
        group, which will invest in projects and firms in Eurasia. This is a complex financial structure that requires
        profits to be paid to investors including the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and salaries and bonuses to be paid to the fund
        managers as well as to the managers of the actual end projects. There will be very little transparency in the
        investments in Eurasian states.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr> loans to financial intermediaries include a subsidiary of the giant Indian conglomerate Tata
        – the Tata Cleantech Sustainable Infrastructure On-Lending Facility – and Turkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi –
        Turkey’s first privately owned development and investment bank, which is majority owned by Turkiye Is Bankasi
        Group, the country’s largest private bank. In other words, these subsidiaries are both SPVs that reduce
        liability and accountability for their owners.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The $500 million <abbr>AIIB</abbr> investment to establish the Asia ESG (Environment, Social, and Governance)
        Enhanced Credit Managed Portfolio in 2019 looks like a way for the new MDB to rapidly increase its portfolio,
        though the Managed Portfolio will take some time to invest in projects. The <a class="item2"></a>ESG ratings
        are meant to signal to investors that the asset is not ‘dirty’ and hence this lowers its risk, though the
        contents of these ratings are deeply problematic. The administrative costs of establishing projects will be
        borne by the new entity and not the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, making the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> look ‘leaner’ than it is.
        The fundamental issues with the intermediaries are their cost, lack of transparency around investments, and
        whether the projects eventually funded support basic human rights and poverty reduction.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A further irony here is that China itself used domestic and direct finance to support its rapid development in
        the 1980s and beyond with the state (through force account) or state-owned companies undertaking most
        infrastructure development. In its development finance, however, China is pushing other countries in the Global
        South to rely on international lending for finance and multinational corporations for construction. These
        examples show that China is pushing a retroliberal agenda that is ‘kicking away the ladder for developing
        countries’ (Yağcı 2016, 43).
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">9.4 Conclusion</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Infrastructure is a core work area for the MDBs. It is also important for development and human well-being.
        There is, however, no simple relationship between the two. The type, quality, accessibility, and environmental
        impacts of infrastructure all need to be context-appropriate for large-scale, costly investments to be a net
        benefit. The MDBs discovered this with their early decades of investment producing poor outcomes and creating
        debt burdens in many countries. Notably, the MDBs now have access to better social cost benefit analysis tools
        than were available in the 1960s and 1970s (Mold 2012), so project selection should be better but these are not
        perfect and large infrastructure investments are still regularly subject to large cost overruns and
        overestimations of their benefits (Flyvbjerg 2009, Flyvbjerg, Garbuio, and Lovallo 2009). But infrastructure is
        back in fashion and it is a key part of the current retroliberal development agenda. The MDBs are being
        pressured to lend because of Chinese development finance and large quantities of surplus private capital
        seeking investments and they are increasingly using complex financial structures to do so.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        This chapter has demonstrated how the MDBs have always promoted private sector participation in infrastructure
        regardless of its efficacy and they are now pushing complex financial mechanisms to increase sectoral
        investment. This is even though the MDBs were created to combat problematic private sector financial
        instruments and World Bank research demonstrating that every financial crisis of the post-Second World War
        period was preceded by ‘innovative’ financial tools (Kose et al. 2020). Further, this research shows that the
        current debt build-up is the fastest and most rapid in the post-war period. All of this suggests that the world
        is heading for another debt crisis and that many infrastructure investments from the MDBs will end up as debts,
        dragging down the prospects of states for decades.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Still, even with the World Bank and MDBs <a class="item2"></a>de-risking projects, there are limits to
        investments. The World Bank (2020) Private Participation in Infrastructure Dashboard tracks projects in 139
        low- and middle-income countries and reveals that between 1990 and 2020 there have been close to 8,200 projects
        investing nearly $2 trillion. However, only 3.17% of this went to low-income countries. Indeed, five countries
        accounted for over 60% of investments – China, Brazil, India, Vietnam, and Russia – and China alone accounted
        for over 27% of investments in 2019. Electricity is the largest sector for investment, as it is one of the
        safest and most profitable sectors. Roads are a distant second, while sectors such as water, sanitation, and
        waste generate very little investment overall and even less in the poorest states. This suggests that direct
        MDB financing still has a role. The MDBs, however, are now more interested in promoting and working with
        financial sector actors than in the hard work of developing project pipelines in difficult though vital sectors
        like sanitation.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Abon, Aura, and Anand Chiplunkar. 2013. “ADB Assistance for Public-Private Partnership in Infrastructure
            Development (1998–2010): Charting a Way Forward.” <em class="calibre4">GREAT Insights</em> 2 (4):11–12.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ahmad, Aijaz, and Abayomi A. Alawode. 2017. <em class="calibre4">Mobilising Islamic Finance for Infrastructure
            Public-Private Partnerships</em>. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Aid Flows. 2019. World Bank. Accessed 17 September. <a href="http://www.aidflows.org" class="item2">http://www.aidflows.org/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Alston, Philp. 2018. Report of the Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights. New York: UN
            General Assembly A/73/396.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable
            Asia and the Pacific</em>. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bateman, Myles, and Susan Engel. 2018. “To Shame or Not to Shame – That Is the Sanitation Question.”
            <em class="calibre4">Development Policy Review</em> 36 (2):155–73. doi: 10.1111/dpr.12317.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bayliss, Kate, and David Hall. 2002. “Unsustainable Conditions — The World Bank, Privatisation, Water and
            Energy.” Public Services International. Accessed April. <a href="http://www.psiru.org" class="item2">http://www.psiru.org</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bayliss, Kate, and Elisa Van Waeyenberge. 2018. “Unpacking the Public Private Partnership Revival.” <em class="calibre4">The
            Journal of Development Studies</em> 54 (4):577–93. doi: 10.1080/00220388.2017.1303671.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Beder, Sharon. 2003. <em class="calibre4">Power Play: The Fight for Control of the World’s Electricity</em>. Melbourne: Sage
            Publications.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bracking, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Money and Power: Great Predators in the Political Economy of Development</em>.
            London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>. 2019. Medium-Term Strategy and Busines Plan 2019–2022. Black Sea Trade and Development
            Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CAF</abbr>. 2000. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 2000</em>. Caracas, Venezuela: Corporacion Andina de Fomento.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CAF</abbr>. 2005. Annual Report 2005. Caracas, Venezuela: Corporacion Andina de Fomento.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CAF</abbr>. 2015. Annual Report 2015. Caracas, Venezuela: Development Bank of Latin America.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan, and Adrian Robert Bazbauers. 2020. “Multilateral Development Banks: Washington Consensus,
            Beijing Consensus or Banking Consensus?” In <em class="calibre4">Rethinking Multilateralism in Foreign Aid: Beyond the
            Neoliberal Hegemony</em>, edited by Viktor Jakupc, Max Kelly and Jonathan Makuwira, 113–31. Abingdon, Oxon
            and New York: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan, and Anggun Susilo. 2014. “Shaming and Sanitation in Indonesia: A Return to Colonial Public
            Health Practices?” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 45 (1):157–78.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engen, Lars, and Annalisa Prizzon. 2018. A Guide to Multilateral Development Banks. London: ODI.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ferguson, Lucy, and Sopie Harman. 2015. “Gender and Infrastructure in the World Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Development
            Policy Review</em> 33 (5):653–71.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Flyvbjerg, Bent. 2009. “Survival of the Unfittest: Why the Worst Infrastructure Gets Built — And What We
            Can Do About It.” <em class="calibre4">Oxford Review of Economic Policy</em> 25 (3):344–67.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Flyvbjerg, Bent, Massimo Garbuio, and Dan Lovallo. 2009. “Delusion and Deception in Large Infrastructure
            Projects: Tow Models for Explaining and Preventing Executive Disaster.” <em class="calibre4">California Management
            Review</em> 51 (2):170–93.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gabor, Daniela. 2018. Understanding the Financialisation of International Development through 11 FAQs.
            Washington, DC: Heinrich Böll Stiftung North America.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Goodman, Joshua. 2019. “World Bank Unit Implicated in Latin America Graft Scandal.” AP, 2 July. Accessed 29
            August. <a href="https://apnews.com" class="item2">https://apnews.com/e2d43a7687724450a987d2649dc599bd?utm_source=emailmarketing&amp;utm_medium=email&amp;utm_campaign=news_lens_11_july_2019&amp;utm_content=2019-07-12</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hostetler, Courtney. 2011. “Going from Bad to Good: Combating Corporate Corruption on World Bank-Funded
            Infrastructure Projects.” <em class="calibre4">Yale Human Rights and Development Law Journal</em> 14 (1):231–72.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IsDB. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 2018</em>. Jeddah: Islamic Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IsDB Group. 2016. <em class="calibre4">42 Years in the Service of Development</em>. Jeddah: Islamic Development Bank Group.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kose, M. Ayhan, Peter Nagle, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Naotaka Sugawara. 2020. <em class="calibre4">Global Waves of Debt:
            Causes and Consequences</em>. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mason, Edward S., and Robert E. Asher. 1973. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank Since Bretton Woods</em>. Washington, DC:
            The Brookings Institution.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mold, Andrew. 2012. “Will It All End in Tears? Infrastructure Spending and African Development in
            Historical Perspective.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of International Development</em> 24:237–54. doi: 10.1002/jid.2818.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            O’Keeffe, Annmaree, Jonathan Pryke, and Hannah Wurf. 2017. Strengthening the Asian Development Bank in 21st
            century Asia. Sydney: Lowy Institute for International Policy.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility. 2013. <em class="calibre4">Infrastructure Maintenance in the Pacific: Challenging
            the Build-Neglect-Rebuild Paradigm</em>. Sydney: Pacific Infrastructure Advisory Centre.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Palestini, Stefano. 2016. Development Banks and Regional Powers: An Analytical Framework. Berlin: KFG,
            Freie Universität Berlin.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2015. “Assessing Accountability in Practice: The Asian Development Bank’s Accountability
            Mechanism.” <em class="calibre4">Global Policy</em> 6 (4):455–65.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ranis, Gustav. 1997. “The World Bank Near the Turn of the Century.” In <em class="calibre4">Global Development Fifty Years
            After Bretton Woods: Essays in Honour of Gerald K. Helleiner</em>, edited by Roy Culpeper, Albert Berry and
            Frances Stewart, 72–89. London: North South Institute / Macmillan Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ray, Shubhomoy. 2015. Infrastructure Financial and Financial Sector Development. Tokyo: Asian Development
            Bank Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rich, Bruce. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Mortgaging the Earth: The World Bank, Environmental Impoverishment, and the Crisis
            of Development</em>. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N. 1961. “Notes on the Theory of the Big Push.” In <em class="calibre4">Economic Development for
            Latin America, Proceedings of a Conference Held by the International Economic Association</em>, edited by
            Howard S. Ellis, 57–81. New York: St Martin’s Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ryan-Collins, Lily, and Stephen Spratt. 2013. “<abbr>CAF</abbr> Development Bank of Latin America’s
            Approach for Infrastructure Financing.” <em class="calibre4">GREAT Insights</em> 2 (4):4–5.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sims, Kearrin. 2015. “The Asian Development Bank and the Production of Poverty: Neoliberalism, Technocratic
            Modernization and Land Dispossession in the Greater Mekong Subregion.” <em class="calibre4">Singapore Journal of Tropical
            Geography</em> 36 (1):112–26. doi: 10.1111/sjtg.12093.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sims, Kearrin. 2020. “The ADB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>: Cooperation, Competition, and Contestation.” In
            <em class="calibre4">Rethinking Multilateralism in Foreign Aid: Beyond the Neoliberal Hegemony</em>, edited by Viktor
            Jakupec, Max Kelly and Jonathan Makuwira, 145–159. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sogge, David, Kees Biekart, and John Saxby, eds. 1996. <em class="calibre4">Compassion and Calculation: The Business of
            Private Foreign Aid</em>. London: Pluto Press with Transnational Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Toye, John. 1993. <em class="calibre4">Dilemmas of Development</em>, 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 1994. <em class="calibre4">World Development Report 1994: Infrastructure for Development</em>. Oxford: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2010. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 2010: Year in Review</em>. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2019. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 2019: Ending Poverty. Investing in Opportunity.</em> Washington, DC:
            World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2020. “Private Participation in Infrastructure Dashboard.” Accessed 1 September. <a href="https://ppi.worldbank.org" class="item2">https://ppi.worldbank.org/en/visualization#sector=&amp;status=&amp;ppi=&amp;investment=&amp;region=&amp;ida=&amp;income=&amp;ppp=&amp;mdb=&amp;year=&amp;excel=false&amp;map=&amp;header=true</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Yağcı, Mustafa. 2016. “A Beijing Consensus in the Making: The Rise of Chinese Initiatives in the
            International Political Economy and Implications for Developing Countries.” <em class="calibre4">Perceptions</em> XXI
            (2):29–56.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Yi-chong, Xu. 2005. “Models, Templates and Currents: The World Bank and Electricity Reform.” <em class="calibre4">Review of
            International Political Economy</em> 12 (4):647–73.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    <h1 class="toc"><a href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter10" class="item2">10 Climate finance</a></h1>

    <div class="item">
      Climate finance ‘refers to local, national, or transnational financing – drawn from public, private, and
      alternative sources of financing – that seeks to support mitigation and adaptation actions that will address
      climate change’ (UNFCCC 2020). Through their climate investments and advisory services, the multilateral
      development banks (MDBs) work as climate intermediaries. Exercising material, technical, and normative influence,
      they draw attention to climate issues and connect different actors in their efforts to adapt, mitigate, and build
      resilience to climate change. The MDBs frame climate action in terms of interventions made possible by financial
      investment, contributing to a narrative that exists largely within the bounds of a market-based, economistic, and
      quantifiable methodology.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      The MDBs originally had fairly poor environmental records but have been reforming and have become influential
      actors in the global economic governance of sustainable development and climate change (Florini and Sovacool
      2009, Käkönen and Kaisti 2012). They are only one part of complex environmental governance networks but are
      notable for their leadership in mainstreaming initiatives like the 2015 <a class="item2"></a>Paris Agreement and
      the Sustainable Development Goals (<a class="item2"></a>SDGs). They have introduced green and blue bonds to
      catalyse private investment. Indeed, ‘multilateral lending is a defining feature of international finance and the
      environment’ (Clapp and Dauvergne 2005, 196).
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      MDB climate actions are diverse. They range from <a class="item2"></a>project financing and resource
      mobilisation, including co-financing and on-lending to the public and private sectors, to building knowledge
      networks and communities of practice, to research and training. These actions make the MDBs climate
      intermediaries that draw together different actors and send signals to private capital about the feasibility of
      and potential rates of return on climate investments. The focus on private investment cannot be understated; the
      MDBs all acknowledge that public multilateral development finance (MDF) is required in the short-term but argue
      that successful climate interventions in the mid- to long-term need private capital. This somewhat naïve
      neoliberal climate mantra holds that with enough finance invested it is possible to manage climate change while
      promoting continuous economic growth.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      The MDBs pursue climate actions to different degrees. Over the past few decades, international focus and
      institutional isomorphism has led almost all to adopt, at the least, corporate climate action plans to align
      their lending operations with sustainable best practice and participate in global climate forums. There are,
      however, differences due to capital availability, shareholder influence, and regional circumstance. Capital and
      mandate restrictions limit some MDBs from financing climate projects, but the larger MDBs are climate leaders, as
      are some of the smaller ones.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      <a class="item2"></a>Shareholder influence and geography play key roles too. The Latin American MDBs are
      exemplars of proactive climate action as the region has been hit hard by climate-related disasters and
      progressive leaders have supported interventions, though regional politics has become more conservative in the
      last few years. Still, as an example, the Caribbean Community’s ‘early political championing of the climate
      change threat’ shaped the Caribbean Development Bank’s (<abbr>CDB</abbr>) robust environmental agenda
      (<abbr>CDB</abbr> 2012). In contrast, the Russian-led Eurasian Development Bank (EDB) and Black Sea Trade and
      Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>BSTDB</abbr>) are laggards and continue to heavily invest in
      petroleum, coal, and oil but the European Union (EU) has ensured that the European Investment Bank (<a class="item2"></a>EIB) has a strategic focus on climate change.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      This chapter outlines the evolving role of the MDBs as climate intermediaries. The first section builds a
      <a class="item2"></a>history of the international climate regime, identifying key turning points in MDB climate
      action. Next, this chapter analyses initiatives by the MDBs to mainstream environmental and climate change
      objectives in their organisational activities. The third section evaluates MDB climate finance approvals,
      detailing both investment volumes and sectoral focuses. The final section examines climate bonds and climate
      finance facilities established, administered, or supported by the MDBs.
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">10.1 Climate history</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (<a class="item2"></a>IPCC), the leading United Nations (UN) body
        debating and coordinating global climate action, proclaimed in the early 2000s that ‘there is now little doubt
        that human-induced climate change is happening’ (cited in Adger et al. 2003, 180). The MDBs have largely taken
        this warning seriously, albeit with inter-organisational differences in practical action and some gaps and
        questions. Multilateral climate finance has evolved with the international climate regime – defined here as the
        global governance framework coordinating state and non-state climate action – over the past several decades.
        There have been four phases in the international climate regime: (i) 1970–87: Limits to Growth and Sustainable
        Development; (ii) 1987–2000: Formalising the International Climate Regime; (iii) 2000–10: From Sustainability
        to Climate Change; and, (iv) 2010–20: Adaptation, Mitigation, and Resilience. These phases, explored briefly
        below, align with key turning points in global climate action, which, in turn, saw organisational, operational,
        and policy shifts in the MDBs.
      </div>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">10.1.1 Phase I: 1970–87: <a class="item6"></a>limits to growth and sustainable
        development</h3>

        <div class="item">
          Connections between development and the environment were first made by the MDBs in the 1970s. In 1971, the
          World Bank prepared the first MDB handbook linking environmental costs to long-term economic growth as an
          acceptable trade-off (Gutner 2002, 51, Lee 1985, x); they pioneered analysis of environmental factors in
          lending operations and conceptualised ‘ways to stabilise the environment so that it could be commercialised
          and used to promote poverty alleviation’ (Yudelman 1976). In other words, the environment was an input to
          economic growth, it was only a matter of finding the right level of exploitation. In 1972, the Club of Rome
          published the influential <em class="calibre4">Limits to Growth</em>, which modelled the consequences of exponential economic
          and population growth on finite natural resources (Meadows et al. 1972). <em class="calibre4">Limits to Growth</em> sparked
          debate about whether economic growth and sustainability are compatible as well as a reformist discussion on
          how best to manage natural resources while improving economic growth. This was a factor in the Inter-American
          Development Bank (IADB) becoming the first MDB to adopt an environmental policy in 1979.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Global concern over environmental sustainability grew throughout the 1970s and 1980s, spurred by heavily
          publicised human-made disasters including the 1978 Amoco Cadiz oil spill, 1984 Bhopal gas tragedy, and 1986
          Chernobyl nuclear accident (Elliott 2004, 13). Further, the dire environmental consequences of numerous MDB,
          particularly World Bank, projects started to emerge. One of the most infamous was the World Bank Polonoroeste
          project paving 1,500 km of highway through the Brazil’s Amazon, which resulted in mass deforestation and
          immiseration of the local Amerindian tribes (Rich 1994). Thus, environmental factors began to be incorporated
          into development assistance, though not very well.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Sustainable development emerged as a concept first in the 1980 UN-led <em class="calibre4">The World Conservation
          Strategy</em> before entering the official communiques of several MDBs, but it was not formalised in lending
          operations or project evaluations (Lee 1985, ix). The 1987 <em class="calibre4">Our Common Future</em>, the report drafted by
          the Brundtland Commission, articulated sustainable development as ‘development that meets the needs of the
          present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ (Brundtland 1987,
          43). The Brundtland Report embedded the sustainable development concept in both policy and public discourse,
          an important step in mainstreaming environmental action (Redclift 2005). It was a key driver for MDBs
          revising their approach to environmental action throughout the 1990s.
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">10.1.2 Phase II: <a class="item6"></a>1987–2000: formalising the international climate
        regime</h3>

        <div class="item">
          The decade following the 1987 Brundtland Report saw the steady formalisation of the international climate
          regime, with the establishment of several environmental agencies. Among the first agencies was the IPCC set
          up in 1988 to assess existing scientific knowledge of human-caused climate change. The international
          community established the Global Environment Facility (GEF) in 1992, initially as a pilot programme with the
          World Bank. The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development – called the Rio Earth Summit – led to
          <em class="calibre4">Agenda 21</em> outlining a non-binding sustainable development agenda. With the adoption of the UN
          Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at the Rio Earth Summit, the GEF became the financing
          mechanism of both <em class="calibre4">Agenda 21</em> and the UNFCCC (Clapp and Dauvergne 2005, 208). The Kyoto Protocol of
          1997, which entered into force in 2005, enacted greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction targets. This was
          followed by the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development and the 2012 Rio +20 Summit.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The 1990s saw the steady formalisation of the environmental governance architecture, with the MDBs gradually
          aligning their operations to key international statements and agendas. Early on, the MDBs acted because of
          poor press and NGO pressure due to the significant environmental damage many of their projects were causing.
          The MDBs thus began to establish organisational departments to address sustainable development, as well as
          draft operational policy and guidelines. While relatively narrow in focus, the steady formalisation of the
          international climate regime led many MDBs to begin substantively engaging with environmental issues, framed
          in the 1990s in terms of sustainable development.
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">10.1.3 Phase III: <a class="item6"></a>2000–10: from sustainability to climate change</h3>

        <div class="item">
          The 2000s began with a highpoint of international collaboration – the launch of the Millennium Development
          Goals (MDGs) – but ended in a breakdown of inter-state cooperation with the failure of the 2009 COP-15
          Copenhagen Summit to set emissions reduction targets. Two significant changes for the MDBs occurred. First,
          as outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a>, the MDGs became a unifying framework for the MDBs and Goal 8
          was ‘to ensure environmental sustainability,’ which institutionalised it in the development banks (Alston
          2005). In 2000, to better accommodate sustainable development and the MDGs, the GEF adopted a new policy
          giving the regional development banks (RDBs) access to GEF funding. This later expanded to include some
          sub-regional and specialised development banks, so there are now eight MDBs among the GEF’s implementing
          agencies. The World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategies – country-level diagnostics proposing loan schedules
          – began to ask sustainability questions from 2001 (Shyamsundar et al. 2001, 3).
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The second significant development, identifiable from the late 2000s, saw the MDBs become key players in
          addressing climate change. With the collapse of COP-15 from stalled inter-state cooperation compounded by the
          spike in protectionist policies following the 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC), climate action lost
          priority for many countries, but this created more space for non-state actors in climate leadership. 2009 was
          a turning point for the MDBs; they demonstrated a concerted acceleration of interest in climate change
          adaptation, mitigation, and resilience, taking on the idea of climate-smart development and not just
          sustainable development (Lipper and Zilberman 2018).
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">10.1.4 Phase IV: 2010–20: adaptation, mitigation, and resilience</h3>

        <div class="item">
          The 2010s saw accelerated concern for climate adaptation (purposive changes to better cope with climate
          change), mitigation (stabilisation or reduction of GHG emissions), and resilience (building infrastructure
          and services to better withstand climate shocks) (Ayers et al. 2014, Henstra 2012, Janetos et al. 2012). The
          rhetoric turned from <em class="calibre4">environmental factors are relevant to development</em> to <em class="calibre4">climate change shapes
          development</em>. During the 1990s, multilateral and bilateral climate finance had tended to be short-term
          funding for ad hoc projects. By the 2010s, it involved longer-term and more substantial investments (Peake
          and Ekins 2017, 833–4). The World Bank nearly doubled annual allocations between 2012 and 2018 and other MDBs
          increased from the mid-decade too.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The 2015 Paris Agreement and SDGs are the lodestars of current MDB climate finance, broadly aligning their
          lending, policy, and normative actions. A joint Climate Change Finance Statement released by several large
          MDBs in September 2019 showed their common approach: commitment to increase climate finance allocation over
          time; catalysing private finance; supporting the Paris Agreement; strengthening climate finance transparency
          reporting; and, transitioning operations away from fossil fuel projects (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>,
          <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, et al. 2019). The priorities are clearly for more finance and more
          private sector finance.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The Paris Agreement entered into force in November 2016. Its centrepiece is the Nationally Determined
          Contributions (NDCs), the emissions reduction and adaptation commitments of countries. The Agreement outlined
          the need to build cooperative networks through the MDBs and climate financing mechanisms to achieve the NDCs
          (Peake and Ekins 2017, Sharma 2017). Many MDBs joined the NDC Partnership Agreement and built their own NDC
          advisory platforms: IADB launched NDC Invest in 2016, the African Development Bank (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>)
          unveiled the African HDC Hub in 2017, and the Asian Development Bank (<abbr>AsDB</abbr>) established NDC
          Advance in 2018 as a technical assistance platform. Other MDBs, such as EIB and <abbr>CDB</abbr>, have not
          developed their own platforms but incorporate measures to ensure lending operations align with recipient NDC
          strategies (Wright et al. 2018). Many MDBs also work with the Green Climate Fund (GCF), proposed in 2009 and
          established in 2011. It is the world’s largest climate fund and was mandated to limit or reduce GHG emissions
          in developing countries and adapt vulnerable societies to climate change. It works through national and
          multinational implementing bodies including 11 MDBs.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The SDGs complement the Paris Agreement and the discursive shift from sustainability to climate action. The
          link between them is that global temperature increases above 1.5°C would make impossible the achievement of
          many of the SDGs and lead to worsening inequalities and a greater likelihood of conflict and humanitarian
          issues (IPCC 2018). The SDGs are much more comprehensive than the MDGs in their climate awareness and even
          imply that ‘[e]conomic growth can no longer be attained at the cost of the environment’ (<abbr>AsDB</abbr>
          2019, viii), but they do not go as far as suggesting that there is a trade-off between the two and they put a
          great deal of faith in technological fixes. While global agreements now indicate that ignoring anthropogenic
          climate change is no longer an option, the selfish retroliberal agenda has seen more and more states walk
          away from international agreements.
        </div>
      </section>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">10.2 Climate <a class="item6"></a>mainstreaming</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Every MDB has mainstreamed environmental actions, defined as ‘the integration of environmental and climate
        change objectives into non-environmental sectors and the “greening” of public policies’ (Benson et al. 2014,
        606). While some have done far more and others far less, they have all acted, with the 2010s seeing a growth in
        mainstreaming. Only the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (<abbr>CABEI</abbr>), Development Bank
        of Latin America (<abbr>CAF</abbr>), European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and New
        Development Bank (NDB) explicitly refer to environmental factors in their establishing agreements; EBRD was
        ‘the first MDB to be born with an environmental mandate’ (Gutner 2002, 62), it being founded in the
        post-Brundtland milieu amidst the formalisation of the climate regime. The significance of so few MDBs formally
        mandated to support climate action shows that the growth of climate finance has been the result of efforts by
        management, member countries, and social movements to foster organisational change (Goldman 2001).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The World Bank was an early adopter of mainstreaming, albeit in somewhat limited forms. In 1987, it established
        an Environmental Department to set policy, planning, and research work but this was largely in response to
        public pressure related to environmental disasters and the Brundtland Report (Goldman 2001, Gutner 2002, Rich
        1994). However, the Bank maintained a very narrow and neoliberal understanding that environmental degradation
        limited economic growth (Castro 2004). Mainstreaming saw the Bank become the largest environmental donor of the
        1990s, providing a third of all multilateral environmental assistance, though this illustrates the lack of
        other resources as much as the Bank’s engagement. Further, there were pertinent criticisms of the Bank’s
        definition of environmental projects as it included large-scale dam projects that displaced large numbers of
        people including tribal communities (Zawahri and Weinthal 2014). Under pressure, the Bank established
        inspection panels and requirements that all projects must submit environmental impact assessments (O’Neill
        2012, 155); the number of environmental staffers increased from five in 1987 to 200 by 1994. The ‘significant
        shift in World Bank policies… in a relatively short period’ (Clapp and Dauvergne 2005, 201) framed how other
        MDBs should restructure their own policies and lending operations, particularly the RDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The RDBs began mainstreaming following the Brundtland Report. Prior to it, they were not aligned; earlier
        environmental policies were largely ad hoc, voluntary guidelines (Gutner 2002, 70). From 2000 onwards,
        isomorphic pressure framed by the Kyoto Protocol, MDGs, and growing public concern led the RDBs to deepen their
        mainstreaming activities. <abbr>AsDB</abbr> approved a new Environmental Policy in 2002, as did
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> in 2004; these policies updated environmental assessment guidelines, revised country
        environmental analyses, and laid the groundwork to expand environmental and energy investments (Delina 2011,
        Posas 2011). Accelerated by the 2015 Paris Agreement and SDGs, the RDBs developed climate change action plans
        to increase their climate investments, establish policy platforms, and catalyse private climate finance. EBRD
        unveiled its <a class="item2"></a>Green Economy Transition (GET) framework in 2015, proposed to achieve a
        target of increasing climate finance to 40% of annual investments by 2020, and it became its main mechanisms to
        support borrower NDCs and the SDGs (EBRD 2018). Further, EIB sent strong signals to other MDBs and private
        capital with its announcement in July 2019 it would cease financing fossil fuel projects by the end of 2021
        (Ambrose 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Compared to the World Bank and RDBs, the other MDBs demonstrate greater variability in their climate actions.
        Various factors shape these differences, including limited capital availability constraining annual approvals
        and shareholder activism either promoting or demoting climate action as a strategic priority. The small scale
        of many of the sub-regional and specialised banks is also a factor. Climate-friendly changes include
        organisational pledges to carbon neutrality, such as the Council of Europe Development Bank (<abbr>CEB</abbr>)
        purchasing hybrid vehicles and <abbr>CABEI</abbr> maintaining a carbon neutral headquarters, and utilising
        renewable energy market mechanisms, with the East African Development Bank (<abbr>EADB</abbr>) purchasing
        UN-certified carbon emissions reduction credits from member countries.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Latin American and Caribbean MDBs have a strong history of climate mainstreaming. <abbr>CAF</abbr>,
        <abbr>CDB</abbr>, and <abbr>CABEI</abbr> have all developed robust policies, demonstrating what large and small
        MDBs are capable of with enough shareholder support. <abbr>CAF</abbr> started its Sustainable Development
        Coordination Office in 1994, which evolved to become the new Vice Presidency of Social and Environmental
        Development in 2004. Recently, it built a climate network with regional organisations to assemble alliances for
        climate finance action (<abbr>CAF</abbr> 2017), a move indicative of norm leadership. <abbr>CDB</abbr> and
        <abbr>CABEI</abbr> have similarly built strong climate frameworks, with <abbr>CDB</abbr> guided by its Climate
        Resilience Strategy 2019–24 drafted to develop its reputation and capabilities as a regional climate leader
        (<abbr>CDB</abbr> 2018a) and <abbr>CABEI</abbr> by its 2015–19 Institutional Strategy that recognises Central
        America as a disaster-prone region and therefore requires climate investments (<abbr>CABEI</abbr> <a class="item2"></a>2015). Further, <abbr>CABEI</abbr> has developed strategic networks to support its climate actions
        – just like <abbr>CAF</abbr> – but has done so with non-regional actors, including the Climate Change
        Adaptation Fund and GCF. For smaller MDBs, accreditation with development funds and networks enables very small
        annual climate commitments to expand considerably.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Other MDBs have engaged less with climate mainstreaming, notably the Russian- and Arab-led MDBs. They do pursue
        some climate actions, but their approach is narrower and more conservative than other MDBs. To illustrate, the
        <a class="item2"></a>International Investment Bank (IIB) has an Environment and Social Policy Framework, but
        its conceptualisation of climate action is narrowly limited to sustainable energy and infrastructure, while
        making considerable allowances for fossil fuel investments. This reflects the importance of carbon-based energy
        to its leading shareholders and their geopolitical pursuit of resource security. Further, while the Arab Bank
        for Economic Development in Africa (<abbr>BADEA</abbr>) became more rhetorically active in the 2010s, action
        lagged. <abbr>BADEA</abbr>’s Seventh Five-Year Plan does not mention climate change, though it does discuss the
        importance of carbon-based and renewable energy sources (<abbr>BADEA</abbr> 2015), a position common across the
        Arab-led MDBs. The Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) has become somewhat more of a climate leader recently,
        publishing its 2019 Climate Change Policy that recognises its members are facing significant obstacles due to
        climate change (IsDB 2019). The Policy is aligned with a 10 Year Strategy that supports the achievement of the
        SDGs by 2030 (Sadik 2018) and has four policy pillars: mainstreaming climate action in lending operations;
        promoting climate change resilience; green growth and the transition to a green economy; and, leveraging
        resources for climate action (IsDB 2019). Yet, <a class="item2"></a>IsDB still allows projects to include
        fossil fuel elements, a reflection of the strategic importance of non-renewables to its main shareholders.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Despite achievements, troubling issues remain. Regarding environmental safeguards applied to projects, Humphrey
        (2016, 4–5) outlines that they are imposed over national laws and thus lead to sovereignty questions, are often
        one-size-fits-all, legalistic, and inflexible, and are expensive and time-consuming with costs paid by the
        borrower. Further, mainstreaming has revealed not a break from traditional MDB operations but attempts to
        integrate climate actions into the neoliberal model – emphasising market-based solutions and private sector
        finance to adapt, mitigate, and build resilience to climate change. As an illustration, most MDBS have climate
        risk management tools, including project exclusion lists prohibiting investments in non-renewables and
        screening tools to evaluate the climate impacts of projects. While such tools are important to minimise the
        negative effects of MDB operations, these tools do not fundamentally transform how development is understood or
        challenge the naïve faith that continuous economic growth is possible.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">10.3 Climate finance</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Annual <a class="item2"></a>sustainable development lending and climate finance by the MDBs has increased in
        volume and scope since the 1980s, paralleling climate mainstreaming. In absolute terms, the UN estimates global
        climate finance – public and private – to have been between $340 and $650 billion in 2014. However, global
        infrastructural, industrial, and energy investments – including carbon-based sectors – in the same year were
        estimated to be in the trillions (<abbr>CEB</abbr> 2016, Peake and Ekins 2017). This disparity is unsurprising,
        given the orientation of global investment patterns towards ‘traditional’ and ‘bankable’ sectors. But, despite
        risk aversion, over the 2010s there was increased support for climate action from both public and private
        capital, especially energy transition investments. Bell (2020, 59–64) identifies two phases in the gradual
        expansion of climate finance markets. First, state intervention prompted by popular pressure or political
        policy agendas encouraged a growth in renewables. Second, the expansion of state intervention signalled
        increasing market returns on investments, leading to greater engagement by private capital with new financial
        innovations emerging. This occurs even though ‘the sunk costs and older path dependencies in the fossil fuel
        sector remain deeply entrenched in energy systems worldwide’ (Bell 2020, 62). This analysis both provides a
        strong logic for MDBs to further engage in climate finance and frames the changes in MDBs. They have played an
        important role as ‘market makers’ for climate markets, catalysing private investment in environmental projects
        and setting common operational standards in project delivery and climate finance tracking (<abbr>CEB</abbr>
        2016).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A 2019 <abbr>AsDB</abbr> Institute report, co-authored by Jeffrey Sachs, argues that the MDBs ‘should help
        finance [environmental] programs in Asia and other regions by raising vastly more long-term debt from the
        capital markets at the prevailing low interest rates and then lending the money to governments and
        public-private investment entities’ (Sachs et al. 2019, 3). The report reveals two important trends: first, the
        focus on <a class="item2"></a>public funding in the short-term to catalyse long-term private investment and,
        second, the increasing financialisation of climate action and <a class="item2"></a>use of debt. The need for
        public financial action is further articulated by Sachs et al. (2019, 5) because private banks ‘consider most
        [renewable energy] projects to be risky’ and their ‘resources come from deposits, and deposits are usually
        short to medium term, whereas green infrastructure projects require long-term finance, resulting in a maturity
        mismatch for banks.’
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, EIB, IADB, and the World Bank began publishing joint annual climate
        finance reports in 2011, following joint press releases starting with COP-15 in 2009. Since 2015, the reports
        have outlined projected climate finance allocations, with <a class="item2"></a>2020 targets being to double or
        triple climate finance approvals. They are also a means to improve transparency, improve cooperation, and
        catalyse private finance. The 2018 Joint Report demonstrates a staggered increase in climate finance approvals
        after the 2015 Paris Agreement (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, et al. 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Several MDBs and the International Development Finance Club (<a class="item2"></a>IDFC) jointly agreed to the
        Common Principles for Climate Adaptation Finance Tracking in March 2015. The Principles were designed to align
        what previously had been ad hoc environmental investments and develop more systematic methodologies to track
        the movement of climate finance. Between <a class="item2"></a>2015 and 2017, the Principles were applied to
        more than 1,000 projects with adaptation finance exceeding $18.6 billion. The IsDB applied the Principles to
        its climate actions beginning in 2018, demonstrating a rollout of the Principles as an institutional norm.
        Other MDBs have built their own methodologies for mapping climate finance. In addition to reporting, the
        Principles have been useful in drawing attention to MDB climate action and, as an attempt to ‘crowd in’ private
        capital, they have led the MDBs to build their capacity to assess climate finance vulnerabilities (Climate
        Finance Tracking Working Group 2018).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The World Bank, RDBs, and <abbr>CAF</abbr> and NIB are the largest MDB climate financiers. It is difficult to
        isolate the climate commitments of many MDBs; some do not list it as a discrete sector, for the NIB (2018) it
        is a cross-cutting theme. Others, like the World Bank, do, but such allocations reflect normative choices, for
        example, in determining what percentage of a sanitation project might count as climate finance. The World
        Bank’s Environment and Natural Resources investment stream delivered 14% of all approvals between 2011 and
        2015; the stream is one of eleven operational priorities. Between 2011 and 2016, the Bank Group committed $52
        billion to over 900 climate projects, an annual average of $10.3 billion. In 2017, following a post-Paris
        Agreement spike, the percentage of climate finance increased to 31% (World Bank 2017). In 2018, the World Bank
        was the largest MDB climate financier, collectively approving close to 50% of all climate finance when ranked
        against the RDBs, followed by EIB and EBRD.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the World Bank, the RDBs have increased their climate finance commitments since the Paris Agreement. In
        2017, <abbr>AfDB</abbr> had 28% of approvals as climate finance, up from 9% in 2016, <abbr>AsDB</abbr> listed
        22% of approvals as climate interventions, and EBRD allocated 43% of OCR to its GET, up from 33% in 2016. Yet,
        the RDBs pursue different climate objectives. <abbr>AfDB</abbr> focusses on a ‘New Deal on Energy’ and policy
        environments attractive to private investment, <abbr>AsDB</abbr> on building climate-resilient infrastructure
        and low-carbon development, and EIB on targeting renewable energy projects and waste and wastewater
        reclamation. RDB climate finance focusses more on mitigation (70% in 2018) than adaptation (30% in 2018), with
        mitigation loans tending to be short-term responses compared to longer-term adaptation projects. In 2018, 71%
        of World Bank and RDB climate finance was delivered as investment projects and only 8% as policy loans, meaning
        that MDB climate finance is project-based. Lastly, sub-Saharan Africa (21%) and Latin America and the Caribbean
        (20%) are the two largest regional recipients of climate action from the <a class="item2"></a>World Bank and
        RDBs (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, et al. 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A 2018 report by E3G, an independent climate change thinktank, analysed the progress of the RDBs relative to
        the Paris Agreement (Wright et al. 2018). It found that while they all had aligned their practices with the
        <a class="item2"></a>Paris Agreement, the IADB and <abbr>AfDB</abbr> excelled as climate leaders in
        transitioning to low-carbon and resilient lending with their respective ratio of renewable climate finance to
        non-renewable finance as 13.9:1 and 5.3:1. The other RDBs performed less well: EBRD 1.2:1, EIB 1:1, and
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> 0.9:1. These ratios are worrying. While the RDBs are committed to increasing their climate
        commitments and to divesting non-renewable energy investments, their critics rightly point out that they are
        not doing this fast enough given both the scale of the climate crisis and the role of the MDBs as market
        leaders.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The smaller MDBs demonstrate considerable variability in their climate commitments, reflecting their
        differences in climate mainstreaming as well as capital availability and shareholder influence. The Latin
        American and Caribbean MDBs are climate leaders, with 37% of <abbr>CABEI</abbr> approvals between 2015 and 2018
        for climate interventions. <abbr>CABEI</abbr> also maintained a portfolio of $1 billion of GCF projects.
        Similarly, <abbr>CEB</abbr> allocated 30% of its annual approvals to environmental projects in 2015 and
        <abbr>CDB</abbr> committed 44% to environmental sustainability and disaster risk reduction in 2017. Other MDBs
        invest far less. <abbr>BADEA</abbr> did not approve any climate change projects in 2017, although 56% of its
        portfolio financed water, sanitation, and power projects, and the Eastern and Southern African Trade and
        Development Bank (TDB), despite policies mainstreaming sustainability, assigned 45% of its trade finance to
        petrochemical transactions in 2016 (<abbr>BADEA</abbr> 2017, TDB 2016). The <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> demonstrates the
        tension between <a class="item2"></a>renewable and non-renewable energy projects for smaller MDBs. In 2019, it
        approved several renewable energy projects, including the Syvash Wind Farm Project in Ukraine and a $65 million
        loan to the $970 million greenfield EFELER Geothermal Power Plant in Turkey. Yet, it also financed offshore oil
        and gas projects in Azerbaijan and Greece, a coal terminal in Russia, and a greenfield waste incineration plant
        in Turkey.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and NDB claim to prioritise sustainable infrastructure investments. For
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, its sustainable energy infrastructure projects favour solar and hydro power
        (<abbr>AIIB</abbr> 2018), despite many climate experts not including hydropower as a sustainable source given
        its impacts on river flows and resettlement. But its lead shareholder China has made major investments in this
        area. NDB has a clear operational focus: sustainable infrastructure development, which is forecast to take
        two-thirds of total project commitments (NDB 2017). Of approved projects between 2016 and 2018, renewable
        energy and transportation projects were most common for NDB, typically involving highway upgrades and wind,
        hydro, and solar construction and storage projects. With a focus on project investment for climate action, the
        lending patterns of the new MDBs closely resemble those of the larger and more established MDBs, notably the
        presumption that infrastructural and technological reforms will solve climate challenges.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">10.4 Climate <a class="item6"></a>bonds and facilities</h2>

      <div class="item">
        MDF organisations have led the establishment and management of climate bonds and various funds and facilities
        to catalyse public and – especially – private investment for climate action. The rise of these <a class="item2"></a>funding mechanisms demonstrates the increasing financialisation of climate policy and the
        overreliance on global and regional financial markets (Layfield 2013). Environmental action has been a key part
        of the financialisation agenda of the MDBs and, as Layfield (2013, 901–2) remarks, a
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          financialised policy goes further than simply relying on market-based instruments to achieve reductions in
          carbon emissions. In this context financialisation refers to the way in which governments identified a
          potentially global problem in the form of anthropogenic climate change, and then permitted a new global
          financial market to emerge as an important means to address this problem.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Still, there are large climate financing <a class="item2"></a>gaps and uncertainty whether private capital will
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          meet the adaptation needs of the poorest and most marginalised people… The world’s least developed countries
          received only 1.9 per cent of global foreign direct investment flows in 2012 and little of this money is
          focused in areas which are adaptation priorities.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (Oxfam 2013)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Yet, the MDBs hold fast to the Maximising Finance for Development (MFD) view that ‘capital markets can provide
        new solutions to age-old development challenges’ (Gabor 2018, 16), be those challenges related to
        infrastructure, climate change, or human development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a>Green bonds are the main financial instrument issued by the MDBs to mobilise private
        finance for climate change solutions. They were pioneered by the EIB in 2007, and their importance has
        increased since the 2015 Paris Agreement to catalyse green private investment (<abbr>AsDB</abbr> 2017). The
        green bond market grew considerably during the 2010s, increasing from $11 billion in 2013 to $42 billion in
        2015 to $250 billion in 2018 (Chang 2019). Between 2007 and 2012, the green bond market was largely comprised
        of MDBs, notably the EIB, World Bank, and International Finance Corporation (IFC), with a few government
        funding agencies and national development banks also involved. The Paris Agreement and entrance of Chinese
        issuers gave the market a large boost (<abbr>AsDB</abbr> 2017, OECD 2017). Green bonds are structured like
        conventional bonds, because having the same or similar risk/return profiles and yield maturities encourages
        private investment (Banga 2019). The main point of difference is that proceeds must finance green projects.
        Blue bonds are a more recent innovation, designed to support the stable conservation and sustainable
        exploitation of the blue economy – sustainable economic activities directly related to oceans and seas
        (<abbr>CDB</abbr> 2018b), though it is worth pausing to ask if this is possible. Seychelles launched the
        world’s first sovereign blue bond in 2018 to leverage finance for the blue economy, which led the
        <abbr>CDB</abbr> to express interest in issuing them.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The green bond market is governed by the voluntary Green Bond Principles. Established in 2014 by a consortium
        of investment banks including Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan, and HSBC, the Principles form an important structuring
        regime adopted by many MDBs, demonstrating their links to banking institutions. Updated in 2018, the Principles
        have four core components: the use of proceeds for actions with clear environmental benefits; processes of
        project evaluation and selection aligned to sustainability objectives and eligibility; management of proceeds
        allowing tracking of investment operations; and, up-to-date reporting on proceeds use (ICMA 2018).
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, <abbr>CEB</abbr>, EBRD, EIB, NIB, and the World Bank are all member
        issuers of the Green Bond Principles, and the West African Development Bank (<abbr>BOAD</abbr>) is an observer.
        Despite the structuring regime of the Principles, criticisms have been raised that the green bond market is far
        too broad to meaningfully identify clear environmental benefits, leading to the potential ‘greenwashing’ of
        non-renewable sectors (Doran and Tanner 2019). Further, while the green bond market has been effective in
        financialising ‘concerns’ about climate change, questions remain whether it has led to quantifiable
        environmental improvements (Tripathy 2017).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EIB issued the first green bond in 2007, labelled a <a class="item2"></a>Climate Awareness Bond. Between
        2007 and 2018, it raised €23.5 billion across 11 currencies, making it the world’s largest green bond issuer
        (Wright et al. 2018). In April 2018, EIB introduced <a class="item2"></a>Sustainability Awareness Bonds, with
        an initial €500 million offering. The World Bank issued its own green bonds in 2008, responding to a request
        from Scandinavian pension funds seeking to support climate projects. It achieved issuances of over $10 billion
        by 2017. EBRD commenced bond issuances in 2010 and NIB in 2011. <abbr>AfDB</abbr> began in 2013, raising $15
        billion between 2013 and 2018, which is significant given that the African green bond market only reached $3
        billion in 2017. <abbr>AsDB</abbr> was comparatively slow to enter the market given that the Asia-Pacific
        region already had a green bond market and was the second largest region for climate-aligned bonds in 2017. In
        regions where bond markets are underdeveloped, the MDBs have taken a leading role in cultivating green and blue
        bond transactions and in assisting governments to issue their own green bonds (Wright et al. 2018).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Smaller MDBs have also engaged with climate bonds, though in more marginal ways compared to the RDBs.
        <abbr>CABEI</abbr> is relatively active and in November 2019 it issued a $375 million floating-rate five-year
        Green Bond, listed on the Luxembourg and Taipei Stock Exchanges, demonstrating the complexity of global
        finances; the issuance led to an aggregate demand of $974 million, driven by Asian (75%) and European (25%)
        investors. The ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development (EBID) has expressed interest in green bond
        issuances, but it is currently limited to policy discussions. In 2017, ECOWAS announced the intention to
        establish a platform for climate finance at COP-23 in Bonn. The statement was preceded by the Declaration of
        Abidjan in June 2017 at the ECOWAS Green Investment Catalyst Roundtable, which discussed the potential for
        green investment in West Africa and constraints posed by a lack of adequate financing and stable legal
        frameworks. The smaller MDBs recognise the utility of climate bond issuances as bolstering their limited
        capital to finance climate interventions. In November 2019, IsDB issued a Green Sukuk, which is a Shari’ah
        compliant green bond. The Islamic MDB has issued sukuks, or Islamic bonds, since 2003 and total international
        sukuk issuances reached $95 billion in 2017 (Sadik 2018, 72–4). Under the Sustainable Finance Framework, IsDB
        is authorised to issue Green Sukuk and Sustainability Sukuk, the main difference between them being that
        Sustainability Sukuk proceeds can be allocated to both environmental and social projects. The <abbr>AIIB</abbr>
        and NDB have also issued green bonds, following trends set by the more established MDBs. Indeed, they began
        issuing them almost immediately after their establishment.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There is a chaotic network of actors, funds, and financing mechanisms supporting the <a class="item2"></a>international climate regime; ‘the current world of climate change finance…, with its multiplicity
        of funds, funding sources, and new financial mechanisms for climate change, makes organising climate change
        finance in an orderly way a daunting task’ (Gomez-Echeverri 2013, 644), leading to coordination difficulties
        and donor overlap. Administered by or in collaboration with the MDBs, climate funds and facilities range from
        the GEF and GCF to smaller multi- donor trusts such as <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s Climate Change Fund established in
        May 2008 and <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s Africa Climate Change Fund founded in April 2014. Despite governance
        complexity, the growth of these funds and facilities has increased access to climate finance and made possible
        more robust pre-investment and technical assistance project support. A range of examples follow.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a>Financial mechanisms such as the GEF and GCF are beneficial for the smaller MDBs in
        accessing climate finance. As an example, <abbr>BOAD</abbr> is limited in its annual approvals and only
        recently engaged substantively with climate action. After receiving accreditation with GEF in 2015 and GCF in
        2016, <abbr>BOAD</abbr> developed a pipeline of projects for WAEMU member countries, receiving over $23 million
        from GEF and $255 million from GCF. Bowman and Minas (2019, 351) regard GCF favourably, arguing that it ‘could
        be a key interlocutor between law- and policy-makers and private sector financiers,’ thereby connecting finance
        with action. In contrast, Kumar (2015) identifies criticisms of GCF, including concerns that it does not
        adequately consult indigenous communities, its processes lack transparency, and it funnels money via large MDBs
        and private banks instead of directly to local institutions in the countries where projects take place.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The MDBs have developed and engaged with numerous other small-scale climate funds and facilities.
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> manages its Climate Change Fund and the Clean Energy Financing Partnerships Facility launched
        in 2007, NIB runs Climate Change, Energy Efficiency, and Renewable Energy lending facility founded in 2008
        endowed with €1 billion, and EIB operates three facilities established in 2004. The creation of these funds and
        facilities illustrates not only the growing demand for climate investments but also the limitations of
        traditional OCR and concessional lending for climate interventions.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        To demonstrate the multitude of climate funds and facilities interacting with one MDB, consider the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>. The African RDB works with the Climate Investment Funds (<abbr>CIFs</abbr>), is accredited
        with GEF, GCF, and the Climate Change Adaptation Fund, and established several regional bodies including the
        Africa Climate Change Fund, ClimDev-Africa Special Fund, Congo Basin Forest Fund, Sustainable Energy Fund for
        Africa, and African Water Facility. The <abbr>CIFs</abbr>, announced in February 2008 by Japan, the UK, and the
        US, provide grants, concessional loans, risk mitigation instruments, and equity to over 70 developing
        countries. A third of CIF funding goes to sub-Saharan Africa and well over half of that goes to the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> (<abbr>AfDB</abbr> 2017). The complex arrangement of funds and facilities engaged by even one
        MDB demonstrates the problems in donor coordination, at the same time the system enables MDBs to access
        different climate finance sources.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Climate bonds and funds and facilities are important instruments to catalyse investment in a sector that
        suffers considerable public and private financing gaps. The growth of green and blue bonds and alternate
        financing mechanisms has not been without risks, however. While making capital available that previously was
        not, the risks include the duplication of scarce resources and expertise resulting in high transaction costs,
        weak visibility and high complexity for recipients, resource competition at the expense of demand-driven
        projects, and poor strategic coordination (Brouder and Garreta 2009).
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">10.5 Conclusion</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Since the 1987 Brundtland Report, there have been concerted efforts to financialise climate action and catalyse
        private investment as argued necessary for long-term climate adaptation, mitigation, and resilience. Writing on
        the World Bank’s environmental lending, Nielson and Tierney (2003, FN120) contended that critics
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          are wrong when they conclude that the Bank is conducting business as usual when it comes to the environment.
          Environmental lending has increased significantly since <a class="item2"></a>1987, the Bank has
          institutionalized checks on the dysfunctional behavior of its staff, the Bank has dramatically decreased
          lending for traditional ‘dirty’ loans, and member governments have significantly increased their ability to
          monitor and sanction behavior that is not consistent with official Bank lending practices.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Though this comment was written almost two decades ago, the fact remains that the MDBs have changed
        significantly since the 1980s and in fact the 2010s saw further improvements.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        While environmentally questionable lending practices remain, the evidence reveals that through climate
        mainstreaming, increased climate finance levels, and the emergence of green and blue bonds and new financing
        windows, the MDF architecture has institutionalised sustainable development and climate actions as legitimate
        and expected organisational behaviours, with the MDBs exercising influence as climate intermediaries. The
        business-as-usual of the MDBs in 2020 is that climate change is an existential threat to 21st-century
        development. Still, the major limitation that must be laid bare is that the MDBs plan to address environmental
        challenges through a market-based capitalist system that still regards growth and sustainability as compatible.
        The MDBs also remain strongly influenced by their shareholders and the retroliberal era has seen many countries
        back or even walk away from meaningful climate action; the Spring 2020 Meetings of the World Bank and IMF did
        not discuss the role of climate action in the <a class="item2"></a>COVID-19 recovery. Further, the mechanisms
        the MDBs favour to address climate change – green bonds and related financialisation – may not be suited to
        achieve a just and equitable transition to a sustainable future. Still, the fondness of the MDBs and private
        capital for new bonds may be a sustaining force for the multilateral promotion of climate action.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Adger, W. Neil, Saleemul Huq, Katrina Brown, Declan Conway, and Mike Hulme. 2003. “Adaptation to Climate
            Change in the Developing World.” <em class="calibre4">Progress in Development Studies</em> 3 (3):179–95. doi:
            10.1191/1464993403ps060oa.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr>. 2017. Growing Green: The <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and CIF for a Climate-Smart Afric. Tunis:
            African Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, EBRD, EIB, IADB, IsDB, NDB, and World Bank Group.
            2019. High Level MDB Statement: Climate Change Finance.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, EIB, IADB, IsDB, and World Bank Group. 2019. 2018 Joint Report
            on Multilateral Development Banks’ Climate Finance. London: European Bank for Reconstruction and
            Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AIIB</abbr>. 2018. Financing Asia’s Future. Beijing: Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Alston, Philip. 2005. “Ships Passing in the Night: The Current State of the Human Rights and Development
            Debate Seen through the Lens of the Millennium Development Goals.” <em class="calibre4">Human Rights Quarterly</em> 27
            (3):755–829. doi: 10.1353/hrq.2005.0030.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ambrose, Jillian. 2019. “EIB Plans to Cut All Funding for Fossil Fuel Projects by 2020.” <em class="calibre4">The
            Guardian</em>, 27 July 2019. <a href="https://www.theguardian.com" class="item2">https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/jul/26/eib-plans-to-cut-all-funding-for-fossil-fuel-projects-by-2020</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 2017. Catalysing Green Finance: A Concept for Leveraging Blended Finance for Green
            Development. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 2019. Strengthening the Environmental Dimensions of the Sustainable Development Goals in
            Asia and the Pacific: Stocktake of National Responses to Sustainable Development Goals 12, 14, and 15.
            Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ayers, Jessica, Saleemul Huq, Helena Wright, Arif M. Faisal, and Syed Tanveer Hussain. 2014. “Mainstreaming
            Climate Change Adaptation into Development in Bangladesh.” <em class="calibre4">Climate and Development</em> 6 (4):293–305.
            doi: 10.1080/17565529.2014.977761.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BADEA</abbr>. 2015. Seventh Five-Year Plan 2015–2019. Khartoum: Arab Bank for Economic Development in
            Africa.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BADEA</abbr>. 2017. Annual Report 2017. Khartoum: Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Banga, Josué. 2019. “The Green Bond Market: A Potential Source of Climate Finance for Developing
            Countries.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Sustainable Finance &amp; Investment</em> 9 (1):17–32. doi:
            10.1080/20430795.2018.1498617.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bell, Stephen. 2020. “The Renewable Energy Transition Energy Path Divergence, Increasing Returns and
            Mutually Reinforcing Leads in the State-Market Symbiosis.” <em class="calibre4">New Political Economy</em> 25 (1):57–71.
            doi: 10.1080/13563467.2018.1562430.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Benson, Emily, Alex Forbes, Mika Korkeakoski, Razi Latif, and Dechen Lham. 2014. “Environment and Climate
            Mainstreaming: Challenges and Successes.” <em class="calibre4">Development in Practice</em> 24 (4):605–14. doi:
            10.1080/09614524.2014.911819.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bowman, Megan, and Stephen Minas. 2019. “Resilience through Interlinkage: The Green Climate Fund and
            Climate Finance Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Climate Policy</em> 19 (3):342–53. doi: 10.1080/14693062.2018.1513358.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Brouder, Alan, and Catherine Garreta. 2009. “Global Environment Facility.” In <em class="calibre4">Handbook of Transnational
            Economic Governance Regimes</em>, edited by Christian Tietje and Alan Brouder, 899–914. Leiden: Koninklijke
            Brill NV.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Brundtland, Gro Harlem. 1987. <em class="calibre4">Our Common Future</em>. Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World
            Commission on Environment and Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CABEI</abbr>. 2015. 2015–2019 Institutional Strategy: Integrating Sustainable Development and
            Competitiveness. Tegucigalpa: Central American Bank for Regional Integration.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CAF</abbr>. 2017. Sustainability Report <abbr>CAF</abbr> 2015–2016. Caracas: Development Bank of
            Latin America.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Castro, Carlos J. 2004. “Sustainable Development: Mainstream and Critical Perspectives.” <em class="calibre4">Organization
            &amp; Environment</em> 17 (2):195–225. doi: 10.1177/1086026604264910.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CDB</abbr>. 2012. Action on Climate Change: Climate Resilience Strategy 2012–2017. St. Michael:
            Caribbean Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CDB</abbr>. 2018a. “<abbr>CDB</abbr> Adopts Updated Climate Resilience Strategy.” Caribbean
            Development Bank, Last Modified 14 December 2018. <a href="https://www.caribank.org" class="item2">https://www.caribank.org/newsroom/news-and-events/cdb-adopts-updated-climate-resilience-strategy</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CDB</abbr>. 2018b. Financing the Blue Economy: A Caribbean Development Opportunity. St. Michael:
            Caribbean Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CEB</abbr>. 2016. Supporting the Transition to a Low-Carbon and Climate-Resilient Economy: The Role
            of Climate Finance. Paris: Council of Europe Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Chang, Youngho. 2019. Green Finance in Singapore: Barriers and Solutions. In <em class="calibre4">ADBI Working Paper
            Series</em>. Manila: Asian Development Bank Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Clapp, Jennifer, and Peter Dauvergne. 2005. <em class="calibre4">Paths to a Green World: The Political Economy of the Global
            Environment</em>. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Climate Finance Tracking Working Group. 2018. Lessons Learned from Three Years of Implementing the MDB-IDFC
            Common Principles for Climate Change Adaptation Finance Tracking. Climate Finance Tracking Working Group.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Delina, Laurence L. 2011. “Asian Development Bank’s Support for Clean Energy.” <em class="calibre4">Climate Policy</em> 11
            (6):1350–66. doi: 10.1080/14693062.2011.579288.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            EBRD. 2018. Implementing the EBRD Green Economy Transition: Technical Guide for Consultants: Reporting on
            Projects Performance Against the Green Economy Transition Approach. London: European Bank for
            Reconstruction and Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Elliott, Lorraine. 2004. <em class="calibre4">The Global Politics of the Environment</em>, 2nd ed. Hampshire: Palgrave
            Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Florini, Ann, and Benjamin K. Sovacool. 2009. “Who Governs Energy? The Challenges Facing Global Energy
            Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Energy Policy</em> 37 (12):5239–48. doi: <a href="https://doi.org" class="item2">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.07.039</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gabor, Daniela. 2018. Understanding the Financialisation of International Development through 11 FAQs.
            Washington, DC: Heinrich Böll Stiftung North America.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Goldman, Michael. 2001. “The Birth of a Discipline: Producing Authoritative Green Knowledge, World
            Bank-Style.” <em class="calibre4">Ethnography</em> 2 (2):191–217. doi: 10.1177/14661380122230894.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gomez-Echeverri, Luis. 2013. “The Changing Geopolitics of Climate Change Finance.” <em class="calibre4">Climate Policy</em>
            13 (5):632–48. doi: 10.1080/14693062.2013.822690.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gutner, Tamar L. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Banking on the Environment: Multilateral Development Banks and Their
            Environmental Performance in Central and Eastern Europe</em>. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Henstra, Daniel. 2012. “Toward the Climate-Resilient City: Extreme Weather and Urban Climate Adaptation
            Policies in Two Canadian Provinces.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis: Research and Practice</em>
            14 (2):175–94. doi: 10.1080/13876988.2012.665215.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2016. Time for a New Approach to Environmental and Social Protection at Multilateral
            Development Banks. In <em class="calibre4">Briefing Paper</em>. London: Overseas Development Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            ICMA. 2018. Green Bond Principles: Voluntary Process Guidelines for Issuing Green Bonds. International
            Capital Markets Association.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Doran, Michael and James Tanner. 2019. “Critical Challenges Facing the Green Bond Market.” International
            Financial Law Review. Accessed 23 September 2019. <a href="https://www.iflr.com" class="item2">https://www.iflr.com/article/b1lmxbv3f6b5td/critical-challenges-facing-the-green-bond-market</a>
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IPCC. 2018. “Global Warming of 1.5°C.” <a href="https://www.ipcc.ch" class="item2">https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IsDB. 2019. Climate Change Policy. Jeddah: Islamic Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Janetos, Anthony C., Elizabeth Malone, Erin Mastrangelo, Karen Hardee, and Ariane de Bremond. 2012.
            “Linking Climate Change and Development Goals: Framing, Integrating, and Measuring.” <em class="calibre4">Climate and
            Development</em> 4 (2):141–56. doi: 10.1080/17565529.2012.726195.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Käkönen, Mira, and Hanna Kaisti. 2012. “The World Bank, Laos and Renewable Energy Revolution in the Making:
            Challenges in Alleviating Poverty and Mitigating Climate Change.” <em class="calibre4">Forum for Development Studies</em> 39
            (2):159–84. doi: 10.1080/08039410.2012.657668.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kumar, Sanjay. 2015. “Green Climate Fund Faces Slew of Criticism.” <em class="calibre4">Nature</em> 527 (7579):419. doi:
            10.1038/nature.2015.18815.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Layfield, David. 2013. “Turning Carbon into Gold: The Financialisation of International Climate Policy.”
            <em class="calibre4">Environmental Politics</em> 22 (6):901–17. doi: 10.1080/09644016.2012.737252.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lee, James A. 1985. The Environment, Public Health, and Human Ecology. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lipper, Leslie, and David Zilberman. 2018. “A Short History of the Evolution of the Climate Smart
            Agriculture Approach and Its Links to Climate Change and Sustainable Agriculture Debates.” In <em class="calibre4">Climate
            Smart Agriculture: Building Resilience to Climate Change</em>, edited by Leslie Lipper, Nancy McCarthy,
            David Zilberman, Solomon Asfaw and Giacomo Branca, 13–30. Cham: Springer.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Meadows, Donella H., Dennis L. Meadows, Jorgen Randers, and William W. Behrens III. 1972. <em class="calibre4">The Limits to
            Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind</em>. New York: Universe
            Books.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            NDB. 2017. General Strategy 2017–2021. Shanghai: New Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            NIB. 2018. Sustainable Financing. Helsinki: Nordic Investment Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Nielson, Daniel L., and Michael J. Tierney. 2003. “Delegation to International Organizations: Agency Theory
            and World Bank Environmental Reform.” <em class="calibre4">International Organization</em> 57 (2):241–76.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            O’Neill, Kate. 2012. <em class="calibre4">The Environment and International Relations</em>. New York: Cambridge University
            Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            OECD. 2017. Mobilising Bond Markets for a Low-Carbon Transition. In <em class="calibre4">Green Finance and Investment</em>.
            Paris: OECD Publishing.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Oxfam. 2013. “Adaptation and the $100 Billion Commitment.” <a href="https://www.oxfam.org" class="item2">https://www.oxfam.org/en/research/adaptation-and-100-billion-commitment</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Peake, Stephen, and Paul Ekins. 2017. “Exploring the Financial and Investment Implications of the Paris
            Agreement.” <em class="calibre4">Climate Policy</em> 17 (7):832–52. doi: 10.1080/14693062.2016.1258633.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Posas, Paula. 2011. “Climate Change in Development Bank Country Environmental Analyses.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of
            Environmental Assessment Policy and Management (JEAPM)</em> 13:459–81. doi: 10.1142/S1464333211003961.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Redclift, Michael. 2005. “Sustainable Development (1987–2005): An Oxymoron Comes of Age.” <em class="calibre4">Sustainable
            Development</em> 13 (4):212–27. doi: 10.1002/sd.281.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rich, Bruce. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Mortgaging the Earth: The World Bank, Environmental Impoverishment, and the Crisis
            of Development</em>. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sachs, Jeffrey D., Wing Thye Woo, Naoyuki Yoshino, and Farhad Taghizadeh-Hesary. 2019. Why is Green Finance
            Important? In <em class="calibre4"><abbr>AsDBI</abbr> Working Paper Series</em>. Manila: Asian Development Bank Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sadik, Abdul-Karim. 2018. “The Role of Arab Development Institutions in Financing Sustainable Development.”
            In <em class="calibre4">Financing Sustainable Development in Arab Countries</em>, edited by Najib Saab and Abdul-Karim
            Sadik, 63–84. Beirut: Arab Forum for Environment and Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sharma, Anju. 2017. “Precaution and Post-caution in the Paris Agreement: Adaptation, Loss and Damage and
            Finance.” <em class="calibre4">Climate Policy</em> 17 (1):33–47. doi: 10.1080/14693062.2016.1213697.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shyamsundar, Priya, Kirk Hamilton, Lisa Segnestam, Maria Sarraf, and S. Frankhauser. 2001. Country
            Assistance Strategies and the Environment. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            TDB. 2016. Annual Report 2016. Bujumbura: Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tripathy, Aneil. 2017. “Translating to Risk: The Legibility of Climate Change and Nature in the Green Bond
            Market.” <em class="calibre4">Economic Anthropology</em> 4 (2):239–50. doi: 10.1002/sea2.12091.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            UNFCCC. 2020. “Introduction to Climate Finance.” United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
            <a href="https://unfccc.int" class="item2">https://unfccc.int/topics/climate-finance/the-big-picture/introduction-to-climate-finance</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2017. World Bank Annual Report 2017. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wright, Helena, James Hawkins, Dileimy Orozco, and Nick Mabey. 2018. Banking on Reform: Aligning
            Development Banks with the Paris Climate Agreement. E3G.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Yudelman, Montague. 1976. “The Role of Agriculture in Integrated Rural Development Projects: The Experience
            of the World Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Sociologia Ruralis</em> 16 (4):308–25.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Zawahri, Neda, and Erika Weinthal. 2014. “The World Bank and Negotiating the Red Sea and Dead Sea Water
            Conveyance Project.” <em class="calibre4">Global Environmental Politics</em> 14 (4):55–74.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    <h1 class="toc"><a href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter11" class="item2">11 Human development</a></h1>

    <div class="item">
      The multilateral development banks (MDBs) have long used the rhetoric of human development and social progress to
      shape their operational strategies. For some, such as the World Bank, ending extreme poverty and promoting shared
      prosperity guide their current missions, while for others like the African Development Bank (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>)
      their revised establishing agreements explicitly include social progress as an organisational purpose. This
      chapter analyses MDB financing for human development, defined here broadly as investing in people to improve
      quality and duration of life (Lind 2019, 422), with a focus on education, health, and gender.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      This chapter arrives at two significant conclusions. First, although finance for education and health can be
      dated to the 1960s, the MDBs only began investing in people in earnest in the late 1980s and some only since the
      early 2000s. With operational histories prioritising infrastructural investment and private sector growth, human
      development is often a secondary consideration, if considered substantively at all. This takeaway is important,
      given that so many MDBs use the rhetoric of human development and social progress to defend their investment
      priorities. Second, human development financing has generally favoured investing in people to improve economic
      growth rather than improve quality of life. Given that the MDBs first articulated their education, <a class="item2"></a>health, and gender policies in the Washington Consensus era, revising those policies time and again
      during the post-Washington Consensus and retroliberal eras, the resultant legacy has been to classify people as
      economic units; human development has come to mean human capital development, which focusses on the utility of
      people as per their productive capacity. This is problematic, as a neoliberal ‘common sense’ understanding of
      human capital necessarily constricts the breadth of options available that the MDBs can pursue in promoting human
      development.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      There is, nevertheless, considerable variation between the MDBs in their human development <a class="item2"></a>financing. Some have engaged substantively. For example, ‘<a class="item2"></a>social services’ was
      the fourth largest investment sector of the Caribbean Development Bank (<abbr>CDB</abbr>) between 1970 and 2000.
      Similarly, ‘social development’ was one of three strategic axes of the Central American Bank for Economic
      Integration (<abbr>CABEI</abbr>) in 2015, accounting for 38.7% of annual approvals. In contrast, other MDBs,
      including the International Investment Bank (IIB) and ECO Trade and Development Bank (ETDB), barely reference the
      concept outside public statements affirming the importance of investing in people for economic growth. Further, a
      handful of MDBs such as the Development Bank of Central Africa States (<abbr>BDEAC</abbr>) and West African
      Development Bank (<abbr>BOAD</abbr>) do not disclose sufficient public information to identify lending patterns,
      although the limited data suggests very low engagement. A few reasons explain the poor commitment of select MDBs
      to human development, low engagement of select MDBs with human development, including limits on annual lending
      capacity, difficulties in assuring loan repayments for <a class="item2"></a>social sector investments compared to
      infrastructural investments, and a lack of borrower interest. Instead of focussing on why certain MDBs do not
      invest substantively in education, health, and gender, this chapter analyses those that do, evaluating how they
      have done so and the policies that have guided their actions. The remainder of this chapter is divided into four
      sections. After first reviewing the literature and MDB financing for human development, the chapter turns to
      education, health, and then gender.
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">11.1 Human development</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Human development entered the lexicon of development in the early 1990s. While initiatives to invest in people
        first emerged in the 1970s in discussions about poverty and basic needs (Javed Burki and Ul Haq 1981, Streeten
        1979), targeted interest in human development was a late <a class="item2"></a>Cold War construct (Cammack
        2017). Human development posits that people are the ends as well as the means of development, challenging the
        conventional view of development understood as per capita economic growth (Ponzio and Ghosh 2016). It combines
        a multidimensional conceptualisation of human well-being and <a class="item2"></a>poverty through a focus on
        the social, cultural, political, and economic institutions which enhance or curtail human capabilities. The
        works of Streeten (1981), Ul Haq (1995), Sen (1990) were foundational to building the concept. The <a class="item2"></a>UNDP’s <em class="calibre4">Human Development Reports</em>, published annually since 1990, were effective in
        mobilising support from governments, MDBs, and civil society organisations, though they did maintain an
        understanding of people as units in economic growth (Cammack 2017).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The World Bank played a leading role in shaping human development in multilateral development finance (MDF),
        comparable to its role in other debates about development. During the Bank’s early decades, it minimised social
        sector financing, prioritising a growth-only agenda via macroeconomic reforms and capital inputs to achieve
        economic growth (Ponzio and Ghosh 2016). Between the 1950s and 1960s, the Bank and others argued that
        investment in social development, including education and healthcare, was counterproductive and ‘would only
        squander limited national resources’ (Kapur, Webb, and Lewis 1997, 115). Robert Cavanaugh, the Bank’s liaison
        between the MDB and Wall Street during the 1950s and 1960s, said,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          If we got into the social field… then the bond market would definitely feel that we were not acting prudently
          from a financial standpoint… If you start financing schools and hospitals and water works, and so forth,
          these things don’t normally and directly increase the ability of a country to repay a borrowing.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (cited in Kapur, Webb, and Lewis 1997, 119–20)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        It was not until 1968 and the appointment of President Robert McNamara that the Bank shifted from a financial
        institution to a ‘<a class="item2"></a>development agency’ (Bazbauers 2018). McNamara, supported by the Bank’s
        first Chief Economist, Keynesian development economist Hollis Chenery, argued that in the absence of
        redistribution of growth, socioeconomic development would be stymied by inequality (Ponzio and Ghosh 2016).
        From McNamara onwards, three broad <a class="item2"></a>anti-poverty initiatives emerged from the Bank:
        anti-poverty as welfare, as protection, and as social development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Anti-poverty as welfare came in the form of investments in education, health, population planning, and
        nutrition, and they occupied a third of the World Bank’s loan portfolio between 1968 and 1981. The rationale
        behind these investments was that enhancing human capital – or the ability of people to perform labour – would
        increase economic growth, a basic needs tenet (Hall 2007, Hunter and Brown 2000). With the arrival of President
        Tom Clausen in 1981, the Bank altered its a poverty strategy by aligning it with the nascent Washington
        Consensus. As a result, it became a model to limit welfare budgets and encourage private sector participation
        in and delivery of welfare services. There was thus a shift to short-term welfare projects with a productivity
        objective, rationalised by the human capital principle that investments in education and health would enhance
        productivity and lead to higher economic growth (Hall 2007).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Yet, the severe social consequences of <a class="item2"></a>neoliberal structural adjustment exposed problems
        in the neoliberal poverty strategy and, buttressed by UNICEF’s 1987 call for ‘adjustment with a human face’
        (Jolly 1991), the Bank under President Barber Conable introduced moderate pro-welfare, anti-poverty measures
        and built minimalist safety nets using social emergency programmes and social action funds (Hall 2007). The
        Bank’s <em class="calibre4">World Development Report 1990: Poverty</em> and <em class="calibre4">World Development Report 2000: Attacking
        Poverty</em> highlight the operational shift, with the former focussed on poverty reduction through enhanced
        productivity and economic growth and the latter on empowerment via pro-poor institutions and the introduction
        of insurance mechanisms such as cash transfers to protect against risks and shocks (World Bank 2000), which
        informed the Bank’s anti-poverty as protection initiative.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Anti-poverty as protection was a response to criticisms posed of neoliberal adjustment. In many developing
        countries, welfare provision services bore the brunt of public spending cutbacks, exacerbating poverty and
        vulnerability (Thomson, Kentikelenis, and Stubbs 2017). In belated response, the World Bank drafted programmes
        to support safety net mechanisms, coming in the forms of conditional income transfers, food programmes, price
        subsidies, microcredits, and fee waivers for health services. These fell under the responsibility of the Social
        Protection Unit launched in the Bank’s Human Development Network in 2001. Conditional cash transfer
        (<abbr>CCT</abbr>) programmes, as a social protection measure, started in Latin America in the late 1990s and
        became popular with the MDBs only in the late 2000s once their poverty reduction impacts could not be ignored.
        They preferred minimalist programmes that still posited development as an individual responsibility before
        that, in particular the very problematic intervention of microfinance (Bateman 2010, Engel and Pedersen 2019,
        Mader 2015). The main objectives of <abbr>CCT</abbr>s are short-term poverty alleviation via cash transfers and
        long-term alleviation through human <a class="item2"></a>capital development (Barham, Maluccio, and Stampini
        2018). The core difference between anti-poverty as welfare and as protection is in the more targeted approach
        of the latter (Fiszbein 2009). Nonetheless, both approaches align on the premise that enhanced human capital
        will lead to increased economic growth.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Anti-poverty as social development dates to social components integrated in World Bank projects approved in the
        1970s but became increasingly institutionalised from the late 1990s following the advent of the post-Washington
        Consensus. In 1996, Bank President James Wolfensohn established a Social Development Task Force to measure the
        social impact of the Bank’s lending operations. This was a reply to the <a class="item2"></a>‘Fifty Years is
        Enough’ campaign as well as Wolfensohn’s personal commitment to enhancing participatory development (Hall
        2007). It provided an important context for the adoption of <a class="item2"></a>Poverty Reduction Strategy
        Papers as a Bank tool as well as new conditional lending modalities, such as development policy loans replacing
        structural adjustment loans in 2004. Whereas anti-poverty as welfare and protection were temporary solutions
        pursued through emergency financing, anti-poverty as social development focussed on social analysis inputs to
        support such initiatives as community-driven development, participation and civic engagement, culture,
        indigenous peoples, conflict prevention, youth, and social accountability during the post-Washington Consensus
        era. This was a more holistic approach than pure neoliberalism, though still a largely instrumentalist and
        constrained approach to human welfare (Cammack 2012, Carroll 2010). Whereas Bank social development lending
        accounted for 5.1% of annual lending in 1980, human development lending totalled 14% in 2015. While still a
        rather modest commitment, the elevated importance of human development is visible.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The current MDB discourse on human development prioritises human capital development. Entering the mainstream
        of development assistance in the 1990s (Gundlach 1996), the concept of human capital rose to prominence in the
        2000s and 2010s as part of a reconfiguration of welfare, poverty, employment, and market competition. The Asian
        Development Bank (<abbr>AsDB</abbr>), Council of Europe Development Bank (<abbr>CEB</abbr>), European
        Investment Bank (EIB), Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), Nordic Investment Bank (NIB), and World Bank all
        promote human capital growth as human development. EIB regards education and health investments as necessary to
        building a competitive and diversified workforce, <abbr>CEB</abbr> in 2005 allocated 13.4% of sectoral
        approvals to human capital development, and IADB identifies labour market insertion – or measures to improve
        employability and reduce barriers to labour market entry – as a human development sub-sector. For NIB, ‘human
        capital and equal economic opportunities’ are one of four institutional drivers, arguing that the ‘quality of
        labour inputs and accumulation of knowledge stock in an economy boost productivity in a similar manner as
        accumulation and improved quality of physical capital’ (Normann 2019). For <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, human capital
        investments have ‘intrinsic value,’ being ‘regarded at the macro level as a key factor of production in the
        economywide production function’ (Son 2010, 2). Lastly, the World Bank established the Human Capital Project in
        2017 as a research and policy toolkit and the <em class="calibre4">World Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of
        Work</em> argues that enhanced human capital is a prerequisite for sustained, inclusive economic growth (World
        Bank 2019). Thus, a persistent focus on human development remains, but it is pursued as investments in human
        capital; a means to invest in people to ensure long-term economic growth (Rossi 2018).
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">11.2 <a class="item6"></a>Education</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The right to education was accepted as a fundamental human right under the Universal Declaration of Human
        Rights in 1948. Yet, in international development assistance, education as a sectoral investment stream has a
        rocky history, with the definition of education fluidly evolving over time and annual financial commitments
        fluctuating greatly. During the 1950s and 1960s, education investments prioritised <a class="item2"></a>technical and vocational education – skills-based approaches then deemed necessary to supplement
        rapid infrastructural growth (Kenneth 2015). Education policy, development, and funding in low-income countries
        were aligned under the modernisation paradigm (Cox 1968). The newly formed discipline of the economics of
        education emerged and ushered in a wave of optimism about the role of education in facilitating economic
        growth. The optimism for skills training and development was short-lived, however, when target-driven plans for
        education in Africa did not generate expected economic outcomes (Kenneth 2015). By the 1980s, education
        priorities shifted for many MDBs following the neoliberal turn, as deregulation and privatisation eroded
        <a class="item2"></a>public education programmes. It was not until the 1990 World Conference on Education for
        All that the rationale for education development reverted to its human rights origins, reinforced by the 2000
        launch of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the 2015 Sustainable Development Goals (<a class="item2"></a>SDGs). A key part of this change was the turn away from user fees for primary education. However,
        even after the <a class="item2"></a>MDGs, MDB education investments remained small. Further, sectoral
        investments have largely aligned with human capital understandings, with education positioned as a contributing
        factor to improving workforces, employability, and competitive economic growth as opposed to improving quality
        of life.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <a class="item2"></a>World Bank’s education programme began in 1962, with a project approved to Tunisia to
        finance middle and secondary school building construction. Over the next two decades, education lending
        comprised a very small percentage of annual approvals – in 1970, of $2.2 billion approved, the Bank allocated
        $79.9 million to education projects, prioritising construction and equipment financing for secondary and
        vocational schools as well as curriculum studies. Education was viewed instrumentally, in terms of relevance to
        economic growth: ‘further education and training beyond the basic level should be provided selectively to
        improve the knowledge and skills needed to carry out economic, social, and other developmental roles’ (World
        Bank 1975, 18).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        From the <a class="item2"></a>Washington Consensus era onwards, World Bank education lending increased but
        remained a small portion of annual approvals, 6.3% in 1985 and 7.25% in 1990. By 1995, the Bank’s education
        portfolio grew to include initiatives to promote equitable access to education for girls and indigenous
        children, while maintaining a strong focus on vocational skills training. The post-Washington Consensus and
        retroliberal eras under the MDGs and SDGs saw little change though emphasised the public savings generated by
        contracting out textbook and supply services to private providers in another example of the marketisation
        agenda. Throughout the 2000s and 2010s, annual education approvals averaged 8% of total annual approvals and
        committed to ‘interventions to help ensure that education builds relevant skills to meet labour market demands’
        (World Bank 2010, 16); a human capital agenda.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The regional development banks (RDBs) largely followed the World Bank’s lead, although the two European RDBs –
        the EIB and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) – have been far less active. This reflects
        the fact that in most European countries the state plays an active role in education and provides the bulk of
        primary and secondary education – the MDBs do not need to encourage investment. The EIB, after decades of
        little engagement with the sector, approved projects in the 2000s and 2010s for primary, secondary, tertiary,
        and vocational education, but at a small percentage of annual approvals; 1.3% in 2000 and 5.5% in 2015. Despite
        comprising only 5.5% of 2015 approvals, that figure was €4.3 billion, larger as a net amount compared to the
        other <a class="item2"></a>RDBs. Building on the European Union’s 2020 Strategy, EIB’s current education
        portfolio prioritises those areas that promote market competitiveness and economic sustainability.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a>IADB and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> have financed education projects far longer than their European
        counterparts. Between 1960 and 1995, IADB approved 153 education loans totalling $2.8 billion, just 3.6% of the
        $78 billion allocated across 2,248 loans. This was maintained in 2005 but increased to 7.2% in 2010; it has
        since maintained an average comparable to the World Bank. Its approach to education sees a balance between
        human development and human capital development, with projects over the 2010s supporting equitable education
        access and adequate school supplies as well as building labour market skills. For <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, vocational
        and higher education loans totalled just over 1% of annual approvals between 1966 and 1975, delivered mostly as
        small loan components rather than stand-alone projects. By 1990, however, <abbr>AsDB</abbr> (1990, 33–4)
        shifted its approach ‘from a rather narrow human capital rationale, typified by an almost exclusive emphasis on
        technical and vocational education, to an approach that embraces the entire sector, including primary,
        non-formal and environmental education.’ During the 2000s, its approach to education drew heavily on new
        communication technologies and private service delivery. By 2010, <a class="item2"></a>education investments
        amounted to 10% of annual approvals, with <abbr>AsDB</abbr> arguing that projects should be oriented to skills
        training and employability, a return to its human capital approach of the 1970s.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Of the sub-regional development bank (SRDBs), only three devote significant resources to education:
        <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, <abbr>CDB</abbr>, and the Development Bank of Latin America (<abbr>CAF</abbr>). FONPLATA
        also finances education projects, but publicly available information is limited and, in 2019, health and
        education projects collectively totalled 4% of new commitments, compared to 63% for logistics and
        transportation. Thus, the <a class="item2"></a>SRDBs most active in education financing all operate in Latin
        America. Yet, the sector still comprises a small percentage of annual and cumulative approvals.
        <abbr>CABEI</abbr> approved $24.8 million in education investments in 2018 of $2.44 billion in new approvals
        and, between 1970 and 2018, <abbr>CDB</abbr> allocated $707.7 million to the sector of a total of $5.2 billion,
        around 13.6%. <abbr>CDB</abbr>’s education portfolio covers a broad agenda, ranging from human development
        projects that improve access to quality early childhood development and teacher effectiveness to human capital
        projects that ensure training is relevant to increased workforce participation and promote gender-equitable
        access to non-traditional occupational areas. <abbr>CAF</abbr>, while also a relatively small education lender,
        launched a $140 million education bond in July 2019, reflecting the financialisation agenda. It is guided by
        its 2018–22 Educational Agenda that details three strategic guidelines: increased access to education, improved
        education quality, and strengthened education relevance, drawing connections between education providers,
        skills development, and employability (<abbr>CAF</abbr> 2018); again demonstrating an instrumental focus around
        human capital development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Education investments by the specialised development banks also exist on a spectrum: (i) not financing
        education projects, as is the case with the newly formed New Development Bank (NDB) and Asian Infrastructure
        Investment Bank (<abbr>AIIB</abbr>) – the closest connection made by the NDB has been in noting that
        transportation projects enable greater access to health, education, and social services; (ii) financing
        small-scale education projects, such as NIB supporting the construction of a multipurpose education facility in
        Rovaniemi, northern Finland, in 2015; and, (iii) relatively active lenders, such as the <abbr>CEB</abbr> and
        <a class="item2"></a>Arab-led MDBs. To illustrate, 8.77% of <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s approvals between 1989 and 1997
        were for education sector projects, a considerable portion given that its two largest sectors were social
        housing (15.9%) and rural modernisation (14.4%). In 2015, however, the sector comprised only 1.5% of new
        approvals. With the refugee crisis taking off in that year, it appears other <a class="item2"></a>investments
        were prioritised. Overall, <abbr>CEB</abbr> mirrors other MDBs in that agreed projects are informed by the
        human capital tenet that an educated and skilled workforce improves a country’s market competitiveness.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The four Arab-led MDBs have all financed education projects, though there are differences between them. Between
        1974 and 2018, the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (<abbr>AFESD</abbr>) and Arab Bank for
        Economic Development in Africa (<abbr>BADEA</abbr>) allocated 7% and 10.4% of the cumulative approvals to the
        social sector, which is a broad field including the health, education, housing, and microfinance sub-sectors.
        To illustrate priorities, <abbr>BADEA</abbr> in 2018 approved a school construction education project,
        indicative of its infrastructure-focussed portfolio. For the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID),
        new education sector approvals amounted to 2% of annual approvals in 2010 and 2.9% in 2018, with projects
        financing school facility upgrades, again suggesting an infrastructure-based approach, like <abbr>AFESD</abbr>
        and <abbr>BADEA</abbr>. The approach of the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) has been more comprehensive. While
        only 3.2% of its total approvals between 1975 and 2019 were for education, its core education priorities in the
        2010s were universal basic education, science and mathematics education for technological advancement,
        vocational training to enhance youth employability, and non-formal education through vocational literacy
        programmes for employability (IsDB Group 2016); a combination of human development and human capital
        investments.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, statistical studies of the MDBs reveal them to be bit players in the education field (Morozkina and
        Sabelnikova 2017), prioritising human capital development by financing infrastructural upgrades and mechanisms
        to improve employability. While sectoral investments have expanded in recent decades, causes for concern
        remain, particularly since the MDBs tend to finance ad hoc projects that do not adequately address systemic
        issues related to educational inequalities and ineffective service provision.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">11.3 <a class="item6"></a>Health</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Health was an early arena of international cooperation, predating MDF. International Sanitary Conferences
        started in 1851 and the League of Nations had a Health Organisation. Since 1948, the World Health Organization
        (<a class="item2"></a>WHO) has been the main international health body promoting and protecting health globally
        (McInnes 2015). During the Keynesian, welfare, modernisation era, there was intense advocacy for strong
        government intervention to overcome systemic health impediments, including poverty, unequal access to health
        services, and assuring high quality care (Zwi and Mills 1995). However, once health became a sectoral focus for
        the MDBs, its conceptualisation – as with education – fluctuated between a rights-based focus on improving
        quality of life for the poor and a human capital-focus on ensuring a healthy, working population to bolster
        economic growth (Sastry and Dutta 2013). In evaluating World Bank health projects, Noy (2018, 17) identified
        that project rationales vary greatly, from prioritising market efficiencies to equity and social development,
        and that they are shaped in part by the strategies and goals of borrowers.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like education, the health sector has remained at the periphery of <a class="item2"></a>MDB action,
        particularly when compared to infrastructure investments. The <a class="item2"></a>World Bank did not adopt a
        formal health policy until 1974. Prior to that, the Bank’s focus was limited to financing health components in
        projects addressing other sectors and the odd project on population or family planning. By the end of the
        Keynesian era, the Bank’s (1980) engagement in the sector was limited to addressing life expectancy, mortality
        rates, and temporary illnesses that impacted worker output; its understanding of health was technical and
        instrumental, a factor potentially impeding economic growth.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        With the neoliberal turn, the World Bank maintained its instrumental outlook but added in the <a class="item2"></a>privatisation and decentralisation of healthcare. A Bank (1987) policy paper argued that the main
        problems facing the health sector in developing countries were poor resource allocation, wasteful(!) public
        health programmes, and inequitable service distribution. Solutions included introducing user fees and private
        insurance as well as privatising public health facilities. The Bank did envisage a residual public system for
        the poor, though circumscribed by a very limited <a class="item2"></a>definition of public health goods: basic
        preventative healthcare, infectious and easily transmittable diseases, and basic maternal and child health
        services; essential, low-cost, high-return interventions. The focus on efficiency and limiting state
        expenditures had little consideration of the catastrophic effect of degrading healthcare, which was to be
        greatly exacerbated by the emerging HIV/AIDS crisis in the 1980s (Birn 2009, Thomson, Kentikelenis, and Stubbs
        2017). Other MDBs such as the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> followed the Bank’s lead, adopting
        similar health policy prescriptions (Coburn, Restivo, and Shandra 2015, Larmour 2002). By 1990, Bank health
        sector financing equalled just 4.5% of annual approvals, with sector priorities being healthcare modernisation,
        immunisation programmes, and construction, equipment, and training.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The graphic consequences of a lack of healthcare support in developing countries was part of what drove the
        shift to the post-Washington Consensus, which promised a slightly friendlier approach to public health but
        delivered little. Even the MDGs did not stop the push for the further privatisation of health services. The
        MDGs listed three <a class="item2"></a>health-related goals: reduce child mortality, improve maternal health,
        and combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases (Komatsu, Low-Beer, and Schwartländer 2007). Influential in
        setting MDF targets, the World Bank and other MDBs aligned their health sector investments behind the MDGs
        (Roth et al. 2018). Alongside the MDGs, the 2002 establishment of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis,
        and Malaria helped centre HIV/AIDS as <em class="calibre4">the</em> priority of global health investments during the 2000s (Lisk
        2009). Funding commitments for HIV/AIDS increased from $300 million in 1996 to $8.8 billion in 2011. The focus
        on HIV/AIDS transformed the narrative from health-to-development to AIDS-to-development, leading to a seismic
        shift in investment priorities away from broader health issues to narrower, target-led goals (Dennis and
        Zuckerman 2008, Woodling, Williams, and Rushton 2012). Further, the HIV/AIDS epidemic was narrowly framed as a
        loss of labour potential, fitting neoliberal the ‘common sense’ of viewing health as a factor in economic
        productivity, and ‘limiting the range of articulations and actions in response to HIV/AIDS’ (Sastry and Dutta
        2013, 36). Particularly relevant is that HIV/AIDS programmes have been criticised as inadequately addressing
        gender dynamics, with ‘fundamentally patriarchal’ programmes placing ‘women in the global South at increased
        risk of HIV/AIDS’ (Sastry and Dutta 2013, 36) and often focussing on maternal health issues above ‘reproductive
        and sexual health rights more broadly’ (Dennis and Zuckerman 2008, 298).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The RDBs all <a class="item2"></a>finance health projects, except for the EBRD, which does not have a health
        sector investment stream but rather references ‘public health benefits’ as components of loan appraisals.
        Annual RDB health sector approvals are low, however. In 2019, the World Bank allocated 7.6% of annual approvals
        ($3.41 billion) to health sector projects, EIB allocated 2.3%, <abbr>AfDB</abbr> 2.4%, and IADB and
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> 3%. These percentages fluctuate, with IADB health sector approvals at 8% in 2015 and 0.2% in
        2000. Cumulative EIB health sector investments were €30 billion over its several-decade history, a relatively
        small amount considering that it approved €69 billion across all sectors in 2018. Thus, although a sector
        promoted by the World Bank and RDBs as vital to human development, financing levels are low. The
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, and IADB prioritise investments for communicable diseases, rural and
        urban health, hospital management, and public-private healthcare delivery. Following a pattern, EIB ‘has
        implicitly taken the view that health is mostly equivalent to healthcare. Indeed, it has concentrated its
        financing mainly on the creation or improvement of hospital infrastructure’ (Schmidt, Moreno, and Goodwin 2007,
        ii); an infrastructure-based human development approach.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In the sub-regional and specialised development banks, project data and annual approvals reveal the health
        sector to be a low priority, with many not investing at all. There are, however, exceptions, notably IsDB and
        <abbr>CEB</abbr>. IsDB invested 2.9% of its cumulative lending portfolio in the health sector between 1975 and
        2019, with health projects approved during the 2010s prioritising two areas: prevention and control of
        <a class="item2"></a>communicable and non-communicable diseases and health system strengthening to improve
        healthcare quality and access (IsDB Group 2016). These areas reflect the post-Washington consensus agenda, with
        the specific diseases used to limit expenditures and the governance focus to ensure technocratic efficiencies.
        <abbr>CEB</abbr> allocated 12.1% of its 2015 approvals to the health sector, predominantly co-financing
        projects for modernising and increasing accessibility to medical infrastructure. Other MDBs that invest only
        marginally in the sector include <abbr>BADEA</abbr>, which approved only one health project in 2018 – financing
        the construction of buildings at a hospital site in Mauritius. In 2018, OFID invested 5% of new approvals in
        the health sector ($140.5 million), focussing on high-burden diseases (HIV/AIDS) and non-communicable diseases
        (cancer and diabetes), again demonstrating a disease-specific focus rather than a comprehensive approach to
        public services.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The initial response of the MDBs to <a class="item2"></a>COVID-19 between March and May 2020 was quick and
        large. Most MDBs devised COVID-19 response plans, ranging from short-term financing during the initial outbreak
        to long-term programmes. The World Bank Group allocated $160 billion to address health, economic, and social
        shocks experienced over 2020 and 2021 and the RDBs provided a further $80 billion. Priorities were medical
        supplies, transmission surveillance, and clinical care facilities, as well as direct cash transfers to the poor
        and vulnerable. A few also utilised previously established pandemic financing mechanisms, such as the World
        Bank’s Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility founded in July 2017 to address to the <a class="item2"></a>2014–15 West Africa Ebola outbreak and <a class="item2"></a>EIB’s Infectious Disease Financing
        Facility that held a €5 billion project pipeline in mid-2020. Emerging financing arrangements were also
        approved by many sub-regional and specialised MDBs, including <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, <abbr>CAF</abbr>,
        <abbr>CDB</abbr>, IsDB, NIB, and the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank (<abbr>BSTDB</abbr>). Though smaller
        in size than the World Bank and RDBs, they demonstrated the capacity of MDBs to quickly allocate emergency
        finance. Even MDBs that would not normally finance the health sector, like <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, drafted pandemic
        response plans.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        COVID-19 revealed the dominance of the retroliberal development agenda. Even with a global pandemic and many
        countries facing unmanageable levels of debt, there was no expansion of grant resources for the Global South.
        Indeed, the US cut funding to WHO. The MDBs, development finance institutions (<abbr>DFI</abbr>s), and some
        Chinese funds were the main financing mechanisms available to many countries. Indeed, there was a very large
        outflow of private capital from the Global South. Further, MDB finance was used to plug holes in health systems
        that had been eroded over decades. Public systems are underfunded, have not focussed sufficiently on pandemic
        preparedness, and have no spare capacity thanks to the relentless neoliberal focus on efficiency. We expect to
        see MDB funds propping up private health providers in developing countries as they are facing financial stress
        and crisis (Williams 2020). This is because many of their most profitable procedures are either being delayed
        by patients or governments or because insurance schemes are struggling due to the level of claims and the
        associated economic disruptions meaning many people cannot pay their insurance premiums.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">11.4 <a class="item6"></a>Gender</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The nexus between women, gender, and development has long been a point of contest. Until very recently, the
        MDBs have largely sidestepped substantive recognition of the significance of women to and gendered inequalities
        in development. This is not to suggest that they have not engaged with gender, but rather that such issues have
        been treated as incidental. There are serious questions about whether MDB gender actions genuinely address
        inequalities or whether they are more rhetorical responses to expectations that they should be part of an
        international organisation’s operations (Aasen 2009).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Many MDBs over the 2010s published reports discussing gender dynamics in their organisations, including
        attempts to better manage corporate diversity. The <abbr>AfDB</abbr> released an internal gender equality
        strategy in 2014 that detailed male to female employment ratios and promotion opportunities as well as
        guidelines for an inclusive workplace. In 2018, <abbr>CEB</abbr> enacted a <a class="item2"></a>gender equality
        strategy for organisational reform. Such reforms are important, for they expose and attempt to redress gendered
        biases. To illustrate, EIB has a severe gender imbalance for internal promotions, with ‘numerous complaints by
        female employees in recent years about the lack of gender diversity and career advancement for women and a
        generally misogynistic culture at the bank’ (De La Baume 2017). The EIB’s lack of gender diversity is not
        unique, with most MDBs disproportionately staffed by men, particularly in management positions, from presidents
        to senior leadership to members of boards of governors and executive directors. This topic is important and
        would benefit from detailed future research, but our focus in this chapter is on MDB lending operations.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Since the 1970s, three primary perspectives on <a class="item2"></a>women, gender, and development have
        evolved: women in development (<abbr>WID</abbr>), women and development (WAD), and <a class="item2"></a>gender
        and development (GAD). Each of the gender-based paradigms occupies a different space in development discourse,
        offering alternate accounts of the impacts of and solutions to reduce inequalities for women (and men), while
        being unified in encouraging greater participation and empowerment of women, and stressing the harm of gender
        exclusion to progressive societal change (Momsen 2004). For the MDBs, actions to address gendered inequalities
        began with the adoption of <abbr>WID</abbr> policies in the 1980s but more recently shifted towards a
        neoliberal variant of GAD; WAD has not entered the policy documents or lending operations of the MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>WID</abbr> was the first academic paradigm drawing <a class="item2"></a>women into development discourse,
        led by Ester Boerup’s (1970) <em class="calibre4">Women’s Role in Economic Development</em>. Adopting a liberal feminist lens,
        <abbr>WID</abbr> challenged modernisation theory’s exclusion of women from development. The paradigm was
        criticised, however, for its oversimplification of women’s work and role in society and its argument that legal
        and administrative reforms were sufficient to address systemic gendered inequalities (Pearson and Jackson 1998,
        Rathgeber 1990, see Benería and Sen 1981, Tinker 1990). Next, WAD came from neo-Marxist feminist analyses in
        the mid-1970s to address <abbr>WID</abbr>’s limitations. It asserts that women have always been important
        economic actors and their work inside and outside the household has been critical to the maintenance of
        (capitalist) society (Pala 1977). WAD regards the perpetuation of dependency and global inequalities as the key
        determinant facing developing countries and women in those societies (Rathgeber 1990), and attention thus
        focusses on the unequal gendered impact of modernisation (Griffin 2009). It has been criticised for inadequate
        attention to social and patriarchal divisions between men and women and for discounting the intersectionality
        of other identities which perpetuate inequalities between women themselves (Parpart 1993). Lastly, GAD emerged
        in the 1980s as a response to silences in <abbr>WID</abbr> and <a class="item2"></a>WAD. It represents a more
        holistic approach and ‘is not concerned with women per se but with the social construction of gender and the
        assignment of specific roles, responsibilities, and expectations to women and to men’ (Rathgeber 1990, 494);
        the focus turns to the relationships between women and men and the impact different gendered roles have on
        development. For GAD, development is multidimensional and is not merely the process of integrating women into
        productive labour but to ensuring women and men benefit from development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Beginning in the 1980s, the MDBs slowly began to incorporate ‘gender’ into their operations. Unlike education
        and health, ‘women’ and ‘gender’ for the MDBs are not investment sectors but rather issues that are taken into
        consideration when drafting loan agreements. While gender <a class="item2"></a>mainstreaming has made progress
        over the past few decades, it remains a less than important issue for most MDBs; common statements appear as
        ‘it is our aim to embed gender issues in all that we do’ as opposed to committing substantive resources to
        addressing gendered inequalities. Since the 1980s, three phases demarcate MDB gender strategies: mid-1980s to
        mid-1990s and <a class="item2"></a><abbr>WID</abbr>, mid-1990s to mid-2000s and GAD, and 2010s (OVE 2018). The
        2010s are particularly significant not only because they have seen an integration of <abbr>WID</abbr> and GAD
        approaches but also because this was when many of the smaller MDBs began engaging with gender issues.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1984 and 1990, the World Bank, IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> introduced their
        <a class="item2"></a>initial <abbr>WID</abbr> policies, prioritising actions that increased women’s access to
        employment, markets, education, and material resources (OVE 2018). These policies predated initiatives by other
        MDBs by at least a decade. Still, projects were often small. For example, under its 1984 <abbr>WID</abbr>
        Gender Directive, the World Bank approved a $7.5 million project to the Gambia to improve women’s economic
        productivity and income earning potential. IADB pursued a <abbr>WID</abbr> agenda in projects as early as 1978,
        but it published its first <abbr>WID</abbr> policy in 1987 that focussed on economic growth and poverty
        alleviation for women through increased access to credit, microenterprise loans, and institutional support for
        women entrepreneurs. Microfinance, as noted earlier, is very problematic as a poverty reduction programme and
        its construction of gender relations and women’s empowerment has been the subject of powerful critiques (Karim
        2011, Yeboah et al. 2015). Still, it remains a preferred policy for many MDBs. Turning to <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, in
        1987 it established a <abbr>WID</abbr> Unit designed to evaluate <abbr>WID</abbr> components in the project
        cycle. <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s approach mirrored the World Bank and other RDBs, with an economistic and
        growth-oriented <abbr>WID</abbr> model. Reflecting Japanese government hostility to gender equality action,
        between 1992 and 1995 the Asian RDB only approved two <abbr>WID</abbr> projects – it had a policy but little
        substantive action.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        By the mid-1990s, the <abbr>WID</abbr> policies of the larger MDBs were replaced by new strategies aligned more
        with a neoliberal GAD paradigm; it was more holistic in addressing social, political, and economic structures
        but favoured market-centric responses. The World Bank (2000) outlined a revised <a class="item2"></a>Gender
        Sector Strategy with measures addressing barriers to women and men gaining equal access to credit, education,
        and healthcare. For IADB, in 1995 then Executive Vice President Nancy Birdsall outlined an initiative to ensure
        that half of projects had gender components by 2000, which was followed in 2003 by a Gender Mainstreaming
        Action Plan to increase the volume of loans, country strategies, and advisory services targeting gender issues.
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> turned towards GAD in its 2001 Gender Policy that sought to embed gender as a crosscutting
        issue alongside the environment, civil society participation, and institutional development and
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s 1998 Policy on Gender and Development proposed a GAD-oriented roadmap, broadly focussing on
        mainstreaming gender in lending operations as well as setting the foundations for a multi-donor Gender and
        Development Cooperation Fund launched in 2003.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The World Bank, IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> again drafted new gender policy documents in the
        2010s, merging <abbr>WID</abbr> and GAD into <a class="item2"></a>‘twin-track strategies’ (OVE 2018, 8). The
        World Bank Group’s (2015) current 2016–23 Gender Equality Strategy prioritises closing education and health
        inequalities, removing employment and land ownership obstacles for women, and enhancing women’s voice and
        agency. IADB’s (2019) 2019–21 Diversity Action Plan for Operations lists five action lines: agenda setting and
        policy development, operational mainstreaming, direct investment, knowledge and dissemination, and
        technological innovation. In 2010, <abbr>AfDB</abbr> unveiled a Gender and Social Development Monitoring
        Division, followed by a new Gender Strategy in <a class="item2"></a>2014 and a Gender Marker System in 2018 to
        track gender mainstreaming in its operations. Prügl (2017, 47) describes such initiatives as
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          the reconstruction of neoliberalism so that it dons a feminist face. This reconstruction preserves the
          privileges of private enterprise, individual responsibility, and the wisdom of the market while recognising
          the inequality-producing force of institutional biases, informal, norms, unequal endowments, and power
          relations in the household and society.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        In 2010, EBRD implemented the first phase of its Gender Action Plan, which was approved in May 2009, drafted to
        support equal opportunity and to promote women entrepreneurship. The Gender Action Plan was replaced in 2015 by
        the Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality 2016–20, which Shields and Wallin (2015) and Shields (2020)
        regard as proposing a neoliberal ‘business case’ for gender mainstreaming, framing women as individualistic
        workers operating in a market economy; a clear articulation of human capital development as opposed to human
        development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        For the SRDBs and specialised development banks, available data reveals considerably less substantive gender
        interventions than the World Bank and RDBs. There are, without question, a few MDBs with robust diversity
        policies that have been translated into action, including <abbr>CDB</abbr> and IFAD, while others have not
        developed clear gender policies, such as the Russian- and Arab-led MDBs, with the notable exception of IsDB.
        The NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr> to date have not financed gender projects, although they have disseminated
        boilerplate press releases stating the importance of women to development. Other MDBs have only very recently
        engaged with gender and therefore details remain scant, such as IsDB and its <a class="item2"></a>Women’s
        Empowerment Policy published in February 2019, which is designed to mainstream gender in its lending,
        analytical work, and organisational practices. Similarly, <abbr>CAF</abbr> created a Gender Equity and
        Inclusion Unit in 2015 to provide gender oversight in projects, but only began applying gender safeguards to
        its entire loan portfolio in 2019.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As a gender leader, <abbr>CDB</abbr> introduced gender <a class="item2"></a>mainstreaming in 2005, with
        initiatives to incorporate gender analyses into lending operations, develop gender analytical frameworks and
        indicators as part of country surveys, and improve gender equality awareness. In December 2008, it approved a
        Gender Equality Policy, followed by its 2015 Gender Equality Policy and Operational Strategy. In 2015, 57% of
        its projects included gender components and between 2012 and 2015 it conducted ten Country Gender Assessments
        of member countries. <abbr>CDB</abbr> thus appears to be one of the most progressive MDBs, prioritising
        economic empowerment for women. Similarly, IFAD has a long gender history, almost rivalling the World Bank and
        RDBs. This history dates to 1992 when it led the Summit on the Economic Advancement of Rural Women that argued
        <abbr>WID</abbr> approaches to be ineffectual in addressing systemic issues leading to gendered inequalities in
        development (IFAD 2018). In 1998, IFAD published its <em class="calibre4">Lending Policies and Criteria</em> that directed
        operational resources to poor rural women and in 2012 it approved the Gender Equality and <a class="item2"></a>Women’s Empowerment Policy. This policy focussed on economic empowerment for rural women, equal
        voice for women and men in rural organisations, and more equitable workloads between women and men, pursued
        through country programmes and projects, advocacy initiatives, and public and private sector capacity building.
        In 2016, IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016–25 identified gender equality as one of five guiding principles,
        shaping not only lending operations but also internal organisational practices. Like <abbr>CDB</abbr>, IFAD is
        a very progressive MDB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The approach taken by the MDBs to women and gender in development is largely one that regards gendered
        inequalities as objects that can be ‘fixed’ through the application of the right resources. While attempts to
        mainstream gender actions and support women’s empowerment and inclusion are essential pursuits by the MDBs, the
        broad approach taken is one that focusses on economic opportunities through resource investment, without
        significantly addressing entrenched cultural values and norms that maintain structural gender imbalances;
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          failure to acknowledge the role of neoliberal economics – privatization and deregulation – and
          depoliticization in consolidating social inequalities leads to the World Bank advocating a developmental
          paradigm that will perpetuate poverty and thus gender inequality.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (Power 2020, 29)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">11.5 Conclusion</h2>

      <div class="item">
        There has been a lot written about the World Bank’s role in human development interventions, and a little about
        some of the other MDBs. We cannot do justice to the literature in this chapter. There are many important
        qualitative analyses of MDB-funded development interventions that shed light on the nature of human
        development, capabilities, and participation. There is important work on the rights of indigenous people,
        minority groups, the disabled, and more that we do not have the space to engage with here. Our focus was to
        provide an overview of the ideas and policies that shaped MDB actions in a few key areas. We demonstrated that
        human development is a difficult space for the MDBs, as they were conceived to fund profitable projects with
        clear quantitative returns on investment. As they shifted from their banking focus towards development, they
        could not ignore the field and did not want to as it gave them a whole new arena to finance. Still, their
        engagement with human development is restrained, despite influencing global discourse on education, health, and
        gender. Ultimately, their approach to human development is framed by neoliberalism. It is thus not surprising
        that, in education, the <a class="item2"></a>human capital approach of creating productive workers trumps
        cultivating educated citizens with rights. In health, the MDBs still extoll market forces despite decades of
        failures and inefficiencies associated with private healthcare provision. And, in gender, we see the agenda of
        ‘fixing women’ to ensure that they are more efficient economic units. Still, the chapter highlighted some
        differences between the MDBs, and such subtleties matter, particularly when considering whether to invest in
        people to improve their productive capacity or to improve quality of life.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Aasen, Berit. 2009. Gender Equality and the Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs): How the World Bank, the
            African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the Inter-American Bank Work on Women Empowerment
            and Gender Equality. In <em class="calibre4">NIBR Working Paper</em>: Norwegian Institute for Urban and Regional Research.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 1990. Annual Report 1990. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Barham, Tania, John Maluccio, and Marco Stampini. 2018. “Long-Term Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfers:
            Review of the Evidence.” <em class="calibre4">IDEAS Working Paper Series from RePEc</em>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bateman, Milford. 2010. <em class="calibre4">Why Doesn’t Microfinance Work?: The Destructive Rise of Local
            Neoliberalism</em>. New York: Zed Books.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2018. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and Transferring Development: Policy Movement through
            Technical Assistance</em>, International Political Economy Series. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Benería, Lourdes, and Gita Sen. 1981. “Accumulation, Reproduction, and “Women’s Role in Economic
            Development”: Boserup Revisited.” <em class="calibre4">Signs</em> 7 (2):279–98. doi: 10.1086/493882.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Birn, Anne-Emanuelle. 2009. “The Stages of International (Global) Health: Histories of Success or Successes
            of History?” <em class="calibre4">Global Public Health</em> 4 (1):50–68. doi: 10.1080/17441690802017797.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Boerup, Ester. 1970. <em class="calibre4">Woman’s Role in Economic Development</em>. London: Allen &amp; Unwin.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CAF</abbr>. 2018. Educational Agenda 2018–2022. Caracas: <abbr>CAF</abbr>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cammack, Paul. 2012. “Risk, Social Protection and the World Market.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Contemporary Asia</em>
            42 (3):359–77. doi: 10.1080/00472336.2012.687627.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cammack, Paul. 2017. “The UNDP, the World Bank and Human Development through the World Market.”
            <em class="calibre4">Development Policy Review</em> 35 (1):3–21. doi: 10.1111/dpr.12198.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Carroll, Toby. 2010. <em class="calibre4">Delusions of Development: The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in
            Southeast Asia</em>. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Coburn, Carolyn, Michael Restivo, and John M. Shandra. 2015. “The African Development Bank and Infant
            Mortality: A Cross-national Analysis of Structural Adjustment and Investment Lending from 1990 to 2006.”
            <em class="calibre4">International Journal of Comparative Sociology</em> 56 (3–4):275–96. doi: 10.1177/0020715215610799.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cox, Robert W. 1968. “Education for Development.” <em class="calibre4">International Organization</em> 22 (1):310–31. doi:
            10.1017/S0020818300013588.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            De La Baume, Maïa. 2017. “Macho Time Warp at the European Investment Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Politico</em>. <a href="https://www.politico.eu" class="item2">https://www.politico.eu/article/european-investment-bank-a-mens-club-at-the-top/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Dennis, Suzanna, and Elaine Zuckerman. 2008. “Mapping Multilateral Development Banks’ Spending on
            Reproductive Health and HIV and AIDS.” <em class="calibre4">Gender and Development</em> 16 (2):287–300.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan, and David Pedersen. 2019. “Microfinance as Poverty-Shame Debt.” <em class="calibre4">Emotions and Society</em>
            fast tracked:1–16. doi: 10.1332/263168919X15653391247919.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Fiszbein, Ariel. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Conditional Cash Transfers Reducing Present and Future Poverty</em>, edited by
            Norbert Rüdiger Schady and Francisco H. G. Ferreira, <em class="calibre4">A World Bank policy research report</em>.
            Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Griffin, Penny. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Gendering the World Bank: Neoliberalism and the Gendered Foundations of Global
            Governance</em>. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gundlach, Erich. 1996. Human Capital and Economic Development: A Macroeconomic Assessment. Kiel: Kiel
            Institute for the World Economy (IfW).
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hall, Anthony. 2007. “Social Policies in the World Bank: Paradigms and Challenges.” <em class="calibre4">Global Social
            Policy</em> 7 (2):151–75. doi: 10.1177/1468018107078160.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hunter, Wendy, and David Brown. 2000. “World Bank Directives, Domestic Interests, and the Politics of Human
            Capital Investment in Latin America.” <em class="calibre4">Comparative Political Studies</em> 33 (1):113–43. doi:
            10.1177/0010414000033001005.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IADB. 2019. Diversity Action Plan for Operations: 2019–2021. In <em class="calibre4">Social Sector</em>, edited by Gender
            and Diversity Division: Inter-American Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IFAD. 2018. Agents of Rural Change: The IFAD Story. Rome: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IsDB Group. 2016. <em class="calibre4">42 Years in the Service of Developmennt</em>. Jeddah: Islamic Development Bank Group.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Javed Burki, Shahid, and Mahbub Ul Haq. 1981. “Meeting Basic Needs: An Overview.” <em class="calibre4">World
            Development</em> 9 (2):167–82. doi: 10.1016/0305-750X(81)90011-5.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Jolly, Richard. 1991. “Adjustment with a Human Face: A UNICEF Record and Perspective on the 1980s.”
            <em class="calibre4">World Development</em> 19 (12):1807–21. doi: 10.1016/0305-750X(91)90026-E.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kapur, Devesh, Richard Charles Webb, and John P. Lewis. 1997. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank: Its First Half
            Century</em>, edited by Richard Charles Webb and John P. Lewis. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Karim, Lamia. 2011. <em class="calibre4">Microfinance and Its Discontents: Women in Debt in Bangladesh</em>. Minneapolis:
            University of Minnesota Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kenneth, King. 2015. “The History and Future of International Cooperation in Education.” In <em class="calibre4">Routledge
            Handbook of International Education and Development</em>, edited by Simon McGrath and Qing Gu, Chapter 27,
            375–389. Abingdon: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Komatsu, Ryuichi, Daniel Low-Beer, and Bernhard Schwartländer. 2007. “Global Fund-supported Programmes
            Contribution to International Targets and the Millennium Development Goals: An Initial Analysis.”
            <em class="calibre4">Bulletin of the World Health Organization</em> 85 (10):805–11. doi: 10.2471/blt.06.038315.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Larmour, P. 2002. “Conditionality, Coercion and Other Forms of ‘Power’: International Financial
            Institutions in the Pacific.” <em class="calibre4">Public Administration and Development</em> 22 (3):249–60. doi:
            10.1002/pad.228.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lind, Niels. 2019. “A Development of the Human Development Index.” <em class="calibre4">Social Indicators Research</em> 146
            (3):409–23. doi: 10.1007/s11205-019-02133-9.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lisk, F. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Global Institutions and the HIV/AIDS Epidemic: Responding to an International
            Crisis</em>. Abingdon: Routledge Taylor &amp; Francis Group.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mader, Philip. 2015. <em class="calibre4">The Political Economy of Microfinance</em>. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            McInnes, Colin. 2015. “WHO’s Next? Changing Authority in Global Health Governance after Ebola.”
            <em class="calibre4">International Affairs</em> 91 (6):1299–316. doi: 10.1111/1468-2346.12454.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Momsen, Jane Henshall. 2004. <em class="calibre4">Gender and Development</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Morozkina, Alexandra, and Ekaterina Sabelnikova. 2017. “Education Systems and Multilateral Development
            Banks: International Practices and Perspectives.” <em class="calibre4">International Organisations Research Journal</em> 12
            (1):24–42. doi: 10.17323/1996-7845-2017-01-24.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Normann, Henrik. 2019. Nordic Investment Bank – Henrik Normann – Answers to UNSW Survey 15.5.2019,
            interviewed by Adrian Robert Bazbauers: UNSW Canberra.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Noy, Shiri. 2018. “Healthy Targets? World Bank Projects and Targeted Health Programmes and Policies in
            Costa Rica, Argentina, and Peru, 1980–2005.” <em class="calibre4">Oxford Development Studies</em> 46 (2):164–83. doi:
            10.1080/13600818.2017.1346068.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            OVE. 2018. Evaluation of the Bank’s Support for Gender and Diversity. Office of Evaluation and Oversight
            (Inter-American Development Bank).
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Pala, Achola O. 1977. “Definitions of Women and Development: An African Perspective.” <em class="calibre4">Signs: Journal of
            Women in Culture and Society</em> 3 (1):9–13. doi: 10.1086/493434.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Parpart, Jane L. 1993. “Who Is the ‘Other‘?: A Postmodern Feminist Critique of Women and Development Theory
            and Practice.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 24 (3):439–64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7660.1993.tb00492.x.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Pearson, Ruth, and Cecile Jackson. 1998. “Introduction: Interrogating Development: Feminism, Gender, and
            Policy.” In <em class="calibre4">Feminist Visions of Development: Gender Analysis and Policy</em>, edited by Ruth Pearson
            and Cecile Jackson. 4–16. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ponzio, Richard, and Arunabha Ghosh. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Human Development and Global Institutions: Evolution,
            Impact, Reform</em>, edited by Arunabha Ghosh, <em class="calibre4">Global institutions series; 115</em>. Abingdon, Oxon:
            Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Power, Luke. 2020. “New Ways or Old Tricks? The World Bank’s Gender Strategy and Its Implications for
            Health.” <em class="calibre4">International Journal of Health Services</em> 50 (1):21–31. doi: 10.1177/0020731419885090.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Prügl, Elisabeth. 2017. “Neoliberalism with a Feminist Face: Crafting a New Hegemony at the World Bank.”
            <em class="calibre4">Feminist Economics</em> 23 (1):30–53. doi: 10.1080/13545701.2016.1198043.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rathgeber, Eva M. 1990. “<abbr>WID</abbr>, WAD, GAD: Trends in Research and Practice.” <em class="calibre4">The Journal of
            Developing Areas</em> 24 (4):489–502.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rossi, Federico. 2018. Human Capital and Macro-Economic Developemnt: A Review of the Evidence. In
            <em class="calibre4">Policy Research Working Paper</em>: World Bank Group.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Roth, Gregory A., Degu Abate, Kalkidan Hassen Abate, Solomon M. Abay, Cristiana Abbafati, Nooshin Abbasi,
            Hedayat Abbastabar, Foad Abd-Allah, Jemal Abdela, Ahmed Abdelalim, Ibrahim Abdollahpour, Rizwan
            Suliankatchi Abdulkader, Haftom Temesgen Abebe, Molla Abebe, Zegeye Abebe, Ayenew Negesse Abejie, Semaw F.
            Abera, Olifan Zewdie Abil, Haftom Niguse Abraha, and Aklilu Roba Abrham. 2018. “Global, Regional, and
            National Age-sex-specific Mortality for 282 Causes of Death in 195 Countries and Territories, 1980–2017: A
            Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017.” <em class="calibre4">The Lancet</em> 392 (10159):1736–88.
            doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32203-7.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sastry, Shaunak, and Mohan Jyoti Dutta. 2013. “Global Health Interventions and the “Common Sense” of
            Neoliberalism: A Dialectical Analysis of PEPFAR.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of International and Intercultural
            Communication</em> 6 (1):21–39. doi: 10.1080/17513057.2012.740682.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Schmidt, Werner, Monica Lledó Moreno, and Judith Goodwin. 2007. Operations Evaluation: Evaluation of EIB
            Financing of Health Projects: Synthesis Report. EIB Operations Evaluation.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sen, Amartya. 1990. “Development as Capability Expansion.” In The Community Development Reader, edited by
            James DeFilippis and Susan Saegert: 41–58. Oxon: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shields, Stuart. 2020. “The EBRD, Fail Forward Neoliberalism and the Construction of the European
            Periphery.” <em class="calibre4">The Economic and Labour Relations Review</em> 31 (2):230–48. doi: 10.1177/1035304620916652.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shields, Stuart, and Sara Wallin. 2015. “The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development’s Gender
            Action Plan and the Gendered Political Economy of Post-Communist Transition.” <em class="calibre4">Globalizations</em> 12
            (3):383–99. doi: 10.1080/14747731.2015.1016307.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Son, Hyun H. 2010. Human Capital Development. In <em class="calibre4">ADB Economics Working Paper Series</em>: Asian
            Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Streeten, Paul. 1979. “Basics Needs: Premises and Promises.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Policy Modeling</em> 1
            (1):136–46.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Streeten, Paul. 1981. <em class="calibre4">First Things First: Meeting Basic Human Needs in the Developing Countries</em>.
            New York: Published for the World Bank by Oxford University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Thomson, Michael, Alexander Kentikelenis, and Thomas Stubbs. 2017. “Structural Adjustment Programmes
            Adversely Affect Vulnerable Populations: A Systematic-Narrative Review of Their Effect on Child and
            Maternal Health.” <em class="calibre4">Public Health Reviews</em> 38 (1):13. doi: 10.1186/s40985-017-0059-2.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tinker, Irene. 1990. <em class="calibre4">Persistent Inequalities: Women and World Development</em>. New York: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ul Haq, Mahbub. 1995. <em class="calibre4">Reflections on Human Development: How the Focus of Development Economics Shifted
            from National Income Accounting to People-centred Policies, Told by One of the Chief Architects of the New
            Paradigm</em>. New York: Oxford University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Williams, Owain D. 2020. “Market Failure, COVID and Private Healthcare.” Accessed 17 August. <a href="https://covid19healthdiaries.com" class="item2">https://covid19healthdiaries.com/diary?did=274</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Woodling, Marie, Owain D. Williams, and Simon Rushton. 2012. “New Life in Old Frames: HIV, Development and
            the ‘AIDS Plus MDGs’ Approach.” <em class="calibre4">Global Public Health</em> 7 (sup2):S144–58. doi:
            10.1080/17441692.2012.728238.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 1975. Annual Report 1975. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 1980. Annual Report 1980. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 1987. Financing Health Services in Developing Countries: An Agenda for Reform. Washington, DC:
            World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2000. World Bank Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2010. Annual Report 2010. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2019. World Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of Work. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank Group. 2015. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16–23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and
            Inclusive Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Yeboah, Thomas, Albert Arhin, Emmanuel Kumi, and Luch Owusu. 2015. “Empowering and Shaping Gender
            Relations? Contesting the Microfinance–Gender Empowerment Discourse.” <em class="calibre4">Development in Practice</em> 25
            (6):895–908.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Zwi, Anthony B., and Anne Mills. 1995. “Health Policy in Less Developed Countries: Past Trends and Future
            Directions.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of International Development</em> 7 (3):299–328. doi: 10.1002/jid.3380070302.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    <h1 class="toc"><a href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter12" class="item2">12 Conclusion</a></h1>

    <div class="item">
      We set ourselves a difficult task in writing a single volume about 30 multilateral development banks (MDBs)
      operating in every corner of the globe over the past 80 years. Undoubtedly, in this breadth we have missed
      important details and writing a simple conclusion about the complex and interdependent architecture of MDF is
      daunting. And, yet, the breadth of the volume has, we think, been useful in unearthing many questions,
      particularly those highlighted by the title of the book. Are the MDBs a system? What is the relationship between
      the MDBs, financial markets, and debt? And what kind of vision of development do the MDBs promote? After we
      respond to these three questions, this concluding chapter briefly considers a future research agenda for the MDBs
      before turning to how <a class="item2"></a>COVID-19 is demonstrating the continued significance of the
      development banks and what we need to be reviewing about them in the context of a global pandemic.
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">12.1 The MDBs as a system</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The book demonstrates that the 30 MDBs largely have the same lineage. They evolved from the post-Second World
        War Keynesian, modernisation, welfare project that sought to tame capitalism but relied on capitalist tools to
        do so, such as banks in the form of the MDBs. Mandate, structure, and governance similarities illustrated in
        Chapters 3–5 makes it evident that the MDBs can be regarded as a system. The establishment of the IDA in the
        World Bank and not in the UN was a key turning point in the history of development finance, promoting a banking
        model for the MDBs over a cooperative focus (Shaw 2005). Still, between 1946 and 1979, the MDBs followed the
        Keynesian formula of promoting balanced investment and economic development, with an expansion of that agenda
        to include social, regional, and sub-regional development. Even MDBs created in and by the Global South, which
        emerged from an anti-colonial and generally developmentalist agenda, largely followed the same model. With the
        <a class="item2"></a>rise of neoliberalism, there came the first neoliberal MDB, the EBRD, with its focus on
        creating market-oriented economies and multi-party democracies. Many other MDBs became partners in the
        neoliberal paradigm or had to admit new shareholders to accommodate the changing exigencies of the global
        financial system.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a> demonstrated that all the MDBs basically follow the organisational blueprint
        laid down by the World Bank, with variations emerging due to differences in capital, shareholders,
        capabilities, and mandates. There is good evidence that the World Bank, RDBs, and a handful other MDBs have
        followed each other in establishing accountability mechanisms, safeguard policies, and anti-corruption
        mechanisms (Komori 2016, Park 2014, 2017). Several international development initiatives also align the MDBs,
        including the 2005 <a class="item2"></a>Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative and a few <a class="item2"></a>OECD
        Development Assistance Committee (<abbr>DAC</abbr>) proposals, for example, the <a class="item2"></a>Aid
        Effectiveness Agenda, which involved 13 of the then 28 MDBs. The MDBs are thus networked in a myriad of ways,
        though the larger MDBs are more networked than most of the smaller ones.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        One main networking and cooperation forum for the MDBs is the Annual and Spring IMF and <a class="item2"></a>World Bank Group Meetings. There are also regular Heads of MDBs and IMF Meetings, which include the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, EIB, IADB, IsDB, World Bank, and IMF. In 2016, the
        <abbr>BRICS</abbr>-led NDB and China-led <abbr>AIIB</abbr> joined these meetings. Further, the MDBs have issued
        joint statements on a range of issues over the past two decades, particularly on the Millennium and Sustainable
        Development Goals and the 2015 Paris Agreement. And there have been and are a range of formal and informal
        working groups on specific topics, for example:
      </div>

      <ul class="list-bullet">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            Heads of procurement from at least ten MDBs have been meeting since 2000 to enhance their work;
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            The Evaluation Cooperation Group was established between the World Bank and <abbr>AfDB</abbr>,
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, and IADB in 1996 and since then the evaluation groups of the <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>,
            EIB, IFAD, IMF, and IsDB have joined;
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            Several MDBs and the <a class="item2"></a>International Development Finance Club (IDFC) jointly agreed to
            the Common Principles for Climate Adaptation Finance Tracking in March 2015; and,
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            The Global Infrastructure Forum was launched in 2016, as was a platform to coordinate on economic migration
            and forced displacement which included seven MDBs.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ul>

      <div class="item">
        The <a class="item2"></a>World Federation of Development Finance Institutions was established in 1979 to
        promote more efficient development banking, increase opportunities for development banks, and expand
        coordination. It is made up of four regional groupings, which all have RDBs and SRDBs as special members and
        other <abbr>DFI</abbr>s (including national development banks and export-import banks) as ordinary members. The
        African association includes the five functional African SRDBs as special members and the IBRD and IFC as
        honorary members. The Asia Pacific grouping’s 117 members include <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, PIDB, the IsDB Group’s
        Islamic Corporation for the Development of the Private Sector (ICD), and the IIB. The Latin American group’s 80
        members include IADB, <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, <abbr>CAF</abbr>, FONPLATA Development Bank, and EIB. There is also a
        special grouping for IsDB members.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IDFC is another coordinating body for the MDBs. It was established in 2011 to help <abbr>DFI</abbr>s set
        agendas on development finance and share know-how. Today it has 26 members including six SRDBs –
        <abbr>BOAD</abbr>, <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>, <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, <abbr>CAF</abbr>, IIB, and TDB – and IsDB through
        the ICD, along with national development banks from both the Global North and South and one export-import bank;
        this demonstrates the connections between the MDBs and between the MDBs and other <abbr>DFI</abbr>s. It claims
        to have $4 trillion in combined assets and annual commitments over $850 billion. The IDFC and World Federation
        of Development Finance Institutions sponsored a joint summit in November 2020 called Finance in Common, which
        brought together 450 global development institutions.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The MDBs also co-finance each other’s projects; EIB’s first loan in 1958 was co-financed by the IBRD. They in
        addition coordinate their lending with each other in different ways, a major one being country-level donor
        coordination groups. Finally, there have been numerous reviews of the MDB system by US and international
        agencies indicating that the global community regards the MDBs as a networked system, though they do not always
        cover the full suite of MDBs.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">12.2 The MDBs, financial markets, and debt</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The first IFIs were created in the wake of a series of crises in the 19th and 20th centuries culminating in the
        1929 <a class="item2"></a>Great Depression. They were the product of an increasingly globalised network of
        money and debt built up with the state system. International financial cooperation emerged slowly from the
        mid-19th century and <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a> identified a range of precedents for MDBs, most
        specifically a Mexican proposal for a development finance element to be added to the inter-American bank idea,
        which was discussed on-and-off from the late 1800s. Still, formal IFIs only emerged at the end of the Second
        World War and they were designed to promote financial openness while controlling the problems that
        international finance markets had already brought.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The MDBs were designed to ensure that states received the investment flows they needed to promote development
        but, in setting up the IBRD as a ‘bank,’ Harry Dexter White and John Maynard Keynes inadvertently created an
        organisation that would not overcome ‘the somewhat violent and not too enlightened motives of capital’ (White
        cited in Oliver 1975, 97). Or, equally to the point, the MDBs could not overcome the violence of capital in the
        absence of an orderly system of default for nation-states. Indeed, the MDBs have and continue to provide loans
        directly – and facilitate private lending for – what the Committee for the Abolition of Illegitimate Debts
        calls illegitimate, odious, and unsustainable debts. That is to say, the MDBs lend to regimes simply because
        they control a territory; they loan regardless of a regime’s legitimacy, respect for human rights, or whether
        the loan benefits the local population (Toussaint 2019). <a class="item2"></a>Safeguard policies have been
        established by the MDBs to limit the latter situation, but the literature is still littered with far too many
        examples of project-linked human rights failings, which is only likely to increase with the greater
        infrastructure focus discussed in <a class="item2">Chapter 9</a>.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The MDBs also helped financialisation in the 1970s thanks to their promotion of lending to the Global South
        and, once the 1982 Debt Crisis hit, the World Bank became a major debt-collector for the Global North. After
        the 1980s, most MDBs became proponents of a neoliberal approach to development, which led to a dramatic
        increase in financialisation. But this financialised capitalism has not proved to be as super-efficient as its
        proponents claimed. Rather, it has been prone to crisis, with major debt crises in 1997 and 2008. As outlined
        in <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a>, 2010–20 saw the ‘largest, fastest and most broad-based increase’ in EMDE
        debt of the past 50 years, even once the impacts of China’s corporate debt bubble were excluded (Kose et al.
        2020, 111). This has occurred along with low interest rates and the growth of new financial ‘innovations,’
        which were present in the previous three debt crises (Kose et al. 2020). Earlier debt crises tended to be
        triggered by banking or financial crises. This time the trigger may be the current global pandemic.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Regardless, the book has demonstrated how the MDB system is entwined with debt networks from other
        <abbr>DFI</abbr>s and private finance and that the MDBs play a pivotal role in this system as direct lenders,
        signallers, facilitators, creators of <a class="item2"></a>‘common sense’ policy frameworks, financial
        innovators, de-riskers, and more. With the shift to the retroliberal development paradigm, states have been
        encouraged to take on more and more debt for development, but the development model is a shadow of its former
        self, mostly just recycling old ideas in a way that sets them on a problematic detour when many should have
        gone straight to landfill.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">12.3 The MDBs <a class="item6"></a>and framing development discourse</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Most MDBs emerged and grew up with the Keynesian, modernisation, welfare model, but their banking DNA meant
        that they tended to focus on the modernisation element and, within that, on bankable projects that demonstrated
        returns to the market. This drive did not disappear even with greater lending for basic needs from the 1970s
        and certainly not with the emergence of the Washington Consensus in the 1980s. When the human cost became too
        high, the post-Washington Consensus arrived to renew the palatability of neoliberalism. What followed was a
        brief progressive interlude, with the Millennium and Sustainable Development Goals targeting poverty
        alleviation and human development. But the penny-pinching returned with the Beyond Aid initiative, and this fed
        into the rise of the current retroliberal development agenda. The influence of China can be seen in an
        old-school focus on infrastructure as facilitating economic growth and an increased emphasis on state
        sovereignty and concurrent dismantling of human rights-based approaches to development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Chapters 9 through 11 explored three main areas of MDB operations: infrastructure, climate finance, and human
        development. Our choice in selecting these areas reflect the fact that Engen and Prizzon (2018) found that in
        2015 infrastructure was the largest MDB sector in terms of disbursements, while the World Bank and
        <abbr>CDB</abbr> had the social sector as their largest area of support, with <abbr>BADEA</abbr> and IADB also
        being quite active. Importantly, as revealed by their human development actions and climate interventions, the
        MDBs tend to finance social and environmental programmes that promote increased productivity as opposed to
        ‘solving’ climate change or improving the lives of people. The three chapters demonstrated how most MDBs follow
        an instrumentalist approach in each of these areas, and that the larger MDBs play a key role in setting the
        normative agenda.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Lastly, the two new MDBs led by the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> and China not only replicated the MDB model, they opted
        for a donor-recipient blueprint, which is less development-friendly than the member-owned, financial
        cooperative agenda envisaged by some the founders of the IBRD. Still, member-led MDBs remain and there are
        examples of innovative, growing banks in the Global South, most notably <abbr>CAF</abbr>.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">12.4 Some thoughts on a <a class="item6"></a>future research agenda</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Turning very briefly to academic research on the MDBs, it is clear from the book that this is a huge field and
        there is much left unexplored. Historical research on almost all the MDBs, apart from the World Bank and a few
        RDBs, remains very limited. Archival access would be a fruitful avenue for expanding understandings of
        development priorities, challenges, and drivers. Equally, an historical analysis of the relationship between
        states and the MDBs both as recipients and donors would reveal much, especially since this has only been done
        for a handful of borrowing states and most research on donor countries focusses on the US. For recipient
        states, questions and topics could include why they have engaged with MDBs, differences in borrowing country
        portfolios, long-term studies of project outcomes, comparative studies of conditionalities and safeguards, the
        relationships between political and business interests in MDB <a class="item2"></a>lending (see Bond 2016,
        2020), and the political economy and practices of MDB procurement (Bracking 2009, Williams-Elegbe 2017). There
        has also been limited research on the impact of the MDBs on labour markets (Murphy 2014) and, while there are
        many important project studies, we think there is space for additional comparative project analyses at the meso
        or macro level.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The complex relationships between the MDBs could use further investigation. This could focus on the World Bank
        and RDBs, or the RDBs and SRDBs in their regions. And the ideas and programmes of the RDBs and SRDBs could give
        historical and contemporary insights into the role of regionalism in development thinking and practice (Bruszt
        and Palestini 2016). Equally there is more scope for research on the RDBs and some of the sub-regional and
        specialised banks as intellectual actors, as Shields (2015) has done on the EBRD. Organisational research on
        MDB leadership would be interesting, from issues of poor gender representation in most MDBs to the professional
        and personal backgrounds linking MDB staff.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There is very little research on the SRDBs, which is peculiar given that they are fascinating and have diverse
        histories and outcomes. Humphrey (2019) has provided some excellent research with a focus on MDB banking
        imperatives but there are other avenues, for example: the pros and cons of the quirks of the SRDBs, such as
        having other <abbr>DFI</abbr>s and commercial banks as shareholders; the story of why and how non-regional
        members joined, like Belarus in the TDB or Barclays Bank and the Consortium of Yugoslav Institutions in the
        <abbr>EADB</abbr>; or, why the <abbr>CDB</abbr> provides a very high level of budgetary support lending.
        Research on the SRDBs could be useful for IR and IPE to better understand cooperative relations between smaller
        or less powerful nation-states. Similarly, the dominance of hegemons in the SRDBs would be quite illustrative;
        for example, Russia’s role in the IBEC, IIB, and EDB could shed light on the financial dimension of Russia’s
        relations with its neighbours and former Soviet states and the relative degrees of coercion and consent
        involved. Research on the extent to which the SRDBs follow mainstream development discourse is very scarce and
        would be illuminating in shedding light on policy diffusion from a constructivist perspective or on neoliberal
        hegemony from a Gramscian one. Finally, research on the SRDBs could be useful for developing a model about what
        kinds of innovations are possible for states genuinely wanting more progressive and equal relationships between
        members in an MDB.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">12.5 COVID-19</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Amid a global pandemic, it would be wrong not to close this book with a few thoughts on how the <a class="item2"></a>MDBs are responding to COVID-19. Indeed, it is vital as the MDBs will be one of the main sources of
        funding for the Global South, if not the main source, given that the Beyond Aid Agenda has seen decreases in
        grant financing and increases in loans. The World Bank has so far committed to providing $160 billion to help
        states address the crisis and a handful of others will provide a further $80 billion. The World Bank is also
        frontloading grants through its COVID-19 <a class="item2"></a>Fast Track Facility with more lending to follow.
        Some of the funding is of course supporting healthcare. Yet, as <a class="item2">Chapter 11</a> briefly
        demonstrated, historical MDB financing to the health sector has been limited and what they have provided has
        tended to support the privatisation and deregulation of public health services. The resultant mixed
        public-private systems in developing countries are often poorly coordinated and do not have the capacity to
        respond to public health emergencies let along a pandemic. The private sector provides most of the hospital
        beds in many developing countries, but many private operators are unwilling to treat COVID-19 patients and
        others are using the crisis as an opportunity to price gouge and some from both these groups are struggling
        financially because of the pandemic’s impacts. Yet, the MDB response to date appears to be a doubling-down on
        support for the private sector; public sector healthcare remains underfunded. This support is unlikely to
        assist the poorest, most vulnerable, and people in rural and remote areas. Indeed, much of it may just bail-out
        urban-based private medical centres. Hence, MDB health financing needs close monitoring and critical scrutiny.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The COVID-19 response of the MDBs is not limited to healthcare concerns. They have allocated significant
        financial allotments to budgetary support, emergency liquidity, and investment loans for economic recovery in
        infrastructure and other areas. Loans to financial intermediaries are proving popular for the World Bank, IFC,
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, <abbr>CEB</abbr>, and others, which is one of the least transparent forms of MDB lending.
        For example, the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>AIIB</abbr> COVID-19 Crisis Recovery Facility is set to provide $10
        billion to public and private organisations from April 2020 to October 2021, with considerable support directed
        to on-lending facilities and credit lines to financial institutions and immediate fiscal and budgetary support,
        including a $500 million credit line to Turkey to alleviate capital shortages. Just as in the healthcare
        sector, close monitoring of loans will be vital to ensure that their benefits are not mostly captured by
        elites, with the middle class and poor ultimately left to pay the bill. The likelihood of misappropriation and
        outright corruption is high across the globe, but higher in states in the Global South dominated by predatory
        domestic power configurations. When COVID-19 hit, rapidly increasing debt was already a concern. Thus, it may
        not be long before the MDBs switch from being vital sources of funds in a pandemic to debt-collectors and
        austerity promoters.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bond, Patrick. 2016. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> Banking and the Debate over Sub-imperialism.” <em class="calibre4">Third World
            Quarterly</em> 37 (4):611–29.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bond, Patrick. 2020. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> Banking and the Demise of Alternatives to the IMF and World Bank.”
            In <em class="calibre4">International Development Assistance and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr></em>, edited by Jose A. Puppim de
            Oliveira and Yijia Jing, 189–218. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bracking, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Money and Power: Great Predators in the Political Economy of Development</em>.
            London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bruszt, Lazlo, and Stefano Palestini. 2016. “Regional Development Governance.” In <em class="calibre4">The Oxford Handbook
            of Comparative Regionalism</em>, edited by Tanja A. Börzel and Thomas Risse, 374–404. Oxford: Oxford
            University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engen, Lars, and Annalisa Prizzon. 2018. <em class="calibre4">A Guide to Multilateral Development Banks</em>. London: ODI.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2019. “‘Minilateral’ Development Banks: What the Rise of Africa’s Trade and Development
            Bank Says about Multilateral Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):164–90. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12467.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Komori, Yasumasa. 2016. “The Asian Development Bank: Joining the Fight against Corruption?” In <em class="calibre4">Global
            Economic Governance and the Practices of the Multilateral Development Banks</em>, edited by Susan Park and
            Jonathan R. Strand, 21–38. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kose, M. Ayhan, Peter Nagle, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Naotaka Sugawara. 2020. <em class="calibre4">Global Waves of Debt:
            Causes and Consequences</em>. Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Murphy, Hannah. 2014. “The World Bank and Core Labour Standards: Between Flexibility and Regulation.”
            <em class="calibre4">Review of International Political Economy</em> 21 (2):399–431. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2013.779591.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Oliver, Robert W. 1975. <em class="calibre4">International Economic Co-operation and the World Bank</em>. London and
            Basingstoke: Macmillan Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2014. “Institutional Isomorphism and the Asian Development Bank’s Accountability Mechanism:
            Something Old, Something New, Something Borrowed, Something Blue?” <em class="calibre4">The Pacific Review</em> 27
            (2):217–39.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2017. “Accountability as Justice for the Multilateral Development Banks? Borrower Opposition
            and Bank Avoidance to US Power and Influence.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International Political Economy</em> 24
            (5):776–801. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2017.1363798.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shaw, D. John. 2005. “Turning Point in the Evolution of Soft Financing: The United Nations and the World
            Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Canadian Journal of Development Studies</em> XXVI (1):43–61.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shields, Stuart. 2015. “The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development as Organic Intellectual of
            Neoliberal Common Sense in Post-Communist Transition.” In <em class="calibre4">Global Economic Governance and the
            Development Practices of the Multilateral Development Banks</em>, edited by Susan Park and Jonathan R.
            Strand, 167–86. Abingdon: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Toussaint, Eric. 2019. <em class="calibre4">The Debt System: A History of Sovereign Debts and Their Repudiation</em>.
            Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Williams-Elegbe, Sope. 2017. <em class="calibre4">Public Procurement and Multilateral Development Banks: Law, Practice and
            Problems</em>. Oxford: Hart.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
