<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Global Architecture of Multilateral Development Banks</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<div class="calibre1">
<div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">5.2 Conclusion</h2>

      <div class="item">
        This chapter has outlined the key structural features of the World Bank, revealing it to be the standard
        template for an MDB. It explored voting systems, capital subscriptions, governance structures, and loan types,
        terms, and conditions. Overall, the clear picture is that the World Bank is a bank-like development
        institution, disciplined by financial markets and focussed on a development as economic growth mentality.
        Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli (2018, 26) argue that the MDBs are not banks because they do not take deposits
        and that they are not licensed or supervised, operating only according to their establishing agreements and
        rules agreed by their Boards of Governors and Directors. Further, as international organisations, they have
        important special features, including ‘preferred creditor treatment, legal ex-territoriality, immunity and so
        on’ (Delikanli, Dimitrov, and Agolli 2018, 22). And, yet, while the MDBs may not meet such formal definitions
        of banks, they are strongly governed by banking and financial norms, credit rating assessments, and global
        capital markets, as both of the IBRD’s official histories have noted (see Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997, Mason
        and Asher 1973) and Humphrey’s (2014, 2016, 2019) excellent recent analysis has demonstrated.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ahluwalia, Montek Singh, Lawrence Summers, Andrés Velasco, Nancy Birdsall, and Scott Morris. 2016.
            <em class="calibre4">Multilateral Development Banking for This Century’s Development Challenges: Five Recommendations to
            Shareholders of the Old and New Multilateral Development Banks</em>. Washington, DC: Centre for Global
            Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Amin, Samir. 2014. <em class="calibre4">Capitalism in the Age of Globalization: The Management of Contemporary Society</em>.
            London and New York: Zed Books.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Babb, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Behind the Development Banks: Washington Politics, World Poverty, and the Wealth of
            Nations</em>. Chicago, IL and London: The University of Chicago Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2018. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and Transferring Development: Policy Movement through
            Technical Assistance</em>. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Behar, Richard. 2012. “Too Big to Fail: The World Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Forbes</em>, 16 July, 86–94.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bello, Walden. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Dark Victory: The United States, Structural Adjustment, and Global Poverty</em>.
            London: Pluto.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bello, Walden, David Kinley, and Elaine Elinson. 1982. <em class="calibre4">Development Debacle: The World Bank in the
            Philippines</em>. San Francisco, CA: Institute for Food and Development Policy and Philippine Solidarity
            Network.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ben-Artzi, Ruth. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Regional Development Banks in Comparison: Banking Strategies versus Development
            Goals</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bracking, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Money and Power: Great Predators in the Political Economy of Development</em>.
            London: Pluto Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cammack, Paul. 2002. “Attacking the Poor.” <em class="calibre4">New Left Review</em> 13:125–34.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Carroll, Toby. 2010. <em class="calibre4">Delusions of Development: The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in
            Southeast Asia</em>. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Caufield, Catherine. 1998. <em class="calibre4">Masters of Illusion: The World Bank and the Poverty of Nations</em>. London:
            Macmillan. Original edition, 1996.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Delikanli, Ihsan Ugur, Todor Dimitrov, and Roena Agolli. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Multilateral Development Banks:
            Governance and Finance</em>. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan. 2010. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank and the Post-Washington Consensus in Vietnam and Indonesia:
            Inheritance of Loss</em>. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan, and Adrian Robert Bazbauers. 2018. “Old and New Development Banks and the Future of
            Development Finance.” FLASCO-ISA Joint International Conference, Quito, Ecuador.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engen, Lars, and Annalisa Prizzon. 2018. <em class="calibre4">A Guide to Multilateral Development Banks</em>. London: ODI.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            English, E. Phillip, and Harris M. Mule. 1996. <em class="calibre4">The African Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne
            Rienner.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gardner, Richard N. 1980. <em class="calibre4">Sterling-dollar Diplomacy in Current Perspective: The Origins and the
            Prospects of our International Economic Order</em>, 3rd ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            George, Susan, and Fabrizio Sabelli. 1994. <em class="calibre4">Faith and Credit: The World Bank’s Secular Empire</em>.
            London: Penguin Books.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Griffith-Jones, Stephany. 2001. <em class="calibre4">Governance of the World Bank</em>. UK: Department for International
            Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hernandez, Diego. 2017. “Are ‘‘New” Donors Challenging World Bank Conditionality?” <em class="calibre4">World
            Development</em> 96 (August):529–49. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.03.035.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2014. “The Politics of Loan Pricing in Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">Review of
            International Political Economy</em> 21 (3):611–39. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2013.858365.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2016. “The Invisible Hand: Financial Pressures and Organisational Convergence in
            Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Journal of Development Studies</em> 52 (1):92–112. doi:
            10.1080/00220388.2015.1075978.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2017. “He Who Pays the Piper Calls the Tune: Credit Rating Agencies and Multilateral
            Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Review of International Organizations</em> 12 (2):281–306. doi:
            10.1007/s11558-017-9271-6.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2019. “‘Minilateral’ Development Banks: What the Rise of Africa’s Trade and Development
            Bank says about Multilateral Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):164–90. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12467.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kapur, Devesh, John P. Lewis, and Richard Webb. 1997. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank Its First Half Century, Volume 1:
            History</em>, 2 vols. Vol. 1: History. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kraske, Jochen. 1996. <em class="calibre4">Bankers with a Mission: The Presidents of the World Bank, 1946–91</em>. Oxford:
            Oxford University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Leech, Dennis, and Robert Leech. 2006. “Voting Power in the Bretton Woods Institutions.” In <em class="calibre4">The IMF,
            World Bank and Policy Reform</em>, edited by Alberto Paloni and Maurizio Zanardi, 27–43. London and New
            York: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mason, Edward S., and Robert E. Asher. 1973. <em class="calibre4">The World Bank Since Bretton Woods</em>. Washington, DC:
            The Brookings Institution.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mayeda, Andrew, and Jessica Shankleman. 2018. “World Bank Edges Near Capital Boost as U.S. Drops
            Objection.” <em class="calibre4">Bloomberg</em>, 22 April.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Oliver, Robert W. 1971. <em class="calibre4">Early Plans for a World Bank</em>, <em class="calibre4">Princeton Studies in International
            Finance No. 29</em>. Princeton, NJ: Department of Economics, Princeton University.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2017. “Accountability as Justice for the Multilateral Development Banks? Borrower Opposition
            and Bank Avoidance to US Power and Influence.” <em class="calibre4">Review of International Political Economy</em> 24
            (5):776–801. doi: 10.1080/09692290.2017.1363798.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            SAPRIN. 2004. The Policy Roots of Economic Crisis and Poverty: A Multi-Country Participatory Assessment of
            Structural Adjustment. Structural Adjustment Participatory Review Initiative Network.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Stiglitz, Joesph. 2006. <em class="calibre4">Making Globalization Work</em>. London: Allen Lane.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Strand, Jonathan R., and Kenneth J. Retzl. 2016. “Did Recent Voice Reforms Improve Good Governance within
            the World Bank?” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 47 (3):415–45.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Urquidi, Victor L. 1996. “Reconstruction vs. Development: The IMF and the World Bank.” In <em class="calibre4">The Bretton
            Woods</em> – <em class="calibre4">GATT System: Retrospect and Prospect After Fifty Years</em>, edited by Orin Kirshner,
            30–51. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharp.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Vestergaard, Jakob. 2010. Voice Reform in the World Bank. Danish Institute of International Studies.
            Accessed 24 November 2020. <a href="https://um.dk" class="item2">https://um.dk/~/media/UM/English-site/Documents/Danida/Partners/Research-Org/Research-studies/Voice%20Reform%20in%20the%20World%20Bank%202010.pdf</a>
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Woods, Ngaire. 2006. <em class="calibre4">The Globalizers: The IMF, the World Bank, and Their Borrowers</em>. Ithaca, NY and
            London: Cornell University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2012. World Bank. 2012. International Bank of Reconstruction and Development Articles of
            Agreement. Washington, DC: World Bank. Accessed 24 November 2020. <a href="https://www.worldbank.org" class="item2">https://www.worldbank.org/en/about/articles-of-agreement/ibrd-articles-of-agreement</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2019. West Bengal Major Irrigation and Flood Management Project (P162679), Combined Project
            Information Documents / Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS). Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            World Bank. 2020. “2015 Development Policy Financing Retrospective – Results and Sustainability.”
            Washington, DC. Accessed 3 April. <a href="https://www.worldbank.org" class="item2">https://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/publication/dpfretrospective2015</a>.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    <h1 class="toc"><a href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter6" class="item2">6 The regional development banks</a></h1>

    <div class="item">
      The regional expansion of the multilateral development bank (MDB) system entrenched multilateral development
      finance (MDF) in the emerging global governance architecture, leading the regional development banks (RDBs) to
      become ‘the titans of the emerging post-war world of development’ (Culpeper 1997, 164). As <a class="item2">Table
      6.1</a> shows, there are five RDBs: <a class="item2"></a>European Investment Bank (EIB), <a class="item2"></a>Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), <a class="item2"></a>African Development Bank
      (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a>Asian Development Bank (<abbr>AsDB</abbr>), and <a class="item2"></a>European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). They largely emerged between 1958 and 1966,
      with the EBRD as an outlier established in 1991. The RDBs closely resemble the IBRD in structure but differ in
      purpose and function, particularly their mandates on regional development, collaboration, and integration. Common
      among the RDBs is the pursuit of regional economic development, with support either for the growth of common
      markets (as in the case of the EIB) or for individual and collective economic and social development (as in the
      IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr>).
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      Over their histories, the RDBs have evolved greatly, to the point of straining their establishing agreements.
      Their <a class="item2"></a>memberships and capital bases have also grown significantly, and their lending
      operations have diversified to both address a broader range of development issues and become more interventionist
      through prescriptive legislative, policy, and institutional reforms. Despite two operating in the Global North
      and the other three in the Global South, the RDBs are similar in that their creation coincided with, and
      reflected, the mainstreaming of development economics and the increasing formalisation of development theory and
      practice. Further, they all promote regional integration (English and Mule 1996, Kappagoda 1995, Tussie 1995).
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      After briefly comparing the governance structures of and main challenges faced by the RDBs, this chapter provides
      an analytical overview of the five RDBs, presented in order of their establishment.
    </div>

    <table class="item8" width="98%">
      <caption class="item9">
        <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 6.1</em> Regional Development Banks Overview</a>
      </caption>

      <thead class="item10">
        <tr class="calibre9">
          <th class="item11">Year</th>

          <th class="item11">Regional Development Banks</th>

          <th class="item11">Region</th>

          <th class="item11">Membership</th>

          <th class="item11">Subscribed Capital</th>

          <th class="item11">Annual Approvals (2018)</th>

          <th class="item11">Credit Rating</th>

          <th class="item11">Headquarters</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody class="calibre10">
        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1958</td>

          <td class="item12">European Investment Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Europe+</td>

          <td class="item12">27</td>

          <td class="item12">$275 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$69 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Luxembourg</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1959</td>

          <td class="item12">Inter-American Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Latin America and the Caribbean</td>

          <td class="item12">48</td>

          <td class="item12">$170.9 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$14.3 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Washington, DC, United States</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1964</td>

          <td class="item12">African Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">80</td>

          <td class="item12">$97 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$10 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire (Tunis, Tunisia from 2003 to 2014)</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1966</td>

          <td class="item12">Asian Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Asia and the Pacific</td>

          <td class="item12">67</td>

          <td class="item12">$153 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$21.6 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Manila, Philippines</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1991</td>

          <td class="item12">European Bank for Reconstruction and Development</td>

          <td class="item12">Europe+</td>

          <td class="item12">66</td>

          <td class="item12">$33.7 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$10.5 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">London, United Kingdom</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <div class="source">
      Source: Annual Reports.
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">6.1 <a class="item6"></a>Governance compared</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The RDBs have similar organisational and managerial structures, mirroring the International Bank for
        Reconstruction and Development’s (<a class="item2"></a>IBRD) corporate makeup almost identically. Although
        different titles are used, the IBRD and RDBs are comprised broadly of Boards of Governors and Directors and
        senior management teams led by Presidents and Vice Presidents, under which are professional staff, loan
        officers, economists, and other employees necessary to run large public organisations. Whereas the IBRD employs
        more than 10,000 people operating in over 120 offices worldwide, the EIB has 2,900 staff (up from 66 in 1958),
        IADB and <abbr>AfDB</abbr> employ 2,000 staff each (the African RDB began in 1966 with ten staff members), and
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and EBRD each employ over 3,000 staff members. For the EBRD, this includes non-staff
        contracted employees. Like the IBRD, the RDBs employ external contractors and consultants to supervise
        projects. Although the RDBs have fewer offices worldwide than the World Bank, they do have country offices,
        resident offices, and regional hubs throughout their working areas. The EIB has 23 country offices in the
        European Union (EU) and 27 offices in Africa, Latin America, and Asia, as well as Australia and the US.
        Similarly, the IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> have country offices throughout their regions
        with the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> also having regional hubs in Africa, while the EBRD has resident offices in all
        countries of operation. Their regional offices mean they are generally better linked into local events than the
        World Bank (Anonymous 2019a, 2019b).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As with the IBRD, the Board of Governors is the supreme governing authority of the RDBs, with control over
        capital increases, appointing and dismissing members, and approving annual reports. Each RDB member is
        represented on the Board by a Governor, with voting power determined by weighted capital share subscriptions.
        As outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a>, this structure enables large vote holders to exercise
        considerable influence over the RDBs, comparable to US influence over the IBRD.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Much formal authority in the RDBs is delegated by the Board of Governors to the Board of Directors, again
        mirroring the IBRD and, like it, the Directors are responsible for the strategic direction of the RDBs and
        approving lending operations. Some have large executive boards, for example, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> has 20
        elected Executive Directors and the EIB has 29 Directors, one appointed by each member country and one by the
        European Commission; the World Bank has 26 Directors. Other RDBs have smaller executive boards. The IADB has 14
        Executive Directors – one for the US and ten regional and three non-regional Directors. The <abbr>AsDB</abbr>
        has 12 Directors – eight representing regional member countries and four non-regionals. Distinguishing regional
        and non-regional shareholdings and Directors was an innovation introduced by the IADB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a>Day-to-day operations in the RDBs are led by Presidents and Vice Presidents, just like the
        IBRD. Reflecting their membership, the EIB and EBRD Presidents are European and likely their selection reflects
        the EU’s rotation of leadership positions among member states. The IADB and <abbr>AfDB</abbr> Presidents have
        been Latin American and African respectively, reflecting their regional missions despite having members from
        outside the region. However, in 2020, the US against all convention proposed a US citizen as IADB President
        (Vigdor 2020). The outlier is the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, whose President has always been Japanese, just as IBRD’s
        Presidents have always been US citizens. Notably, the IADB’s Executive Vice President – its second-in-command –
        has always been from the US, with an exceptional appointee being Nancy Birdsall during the 1990s. This
        highlights one of the key <a class="item2"></a>challenges for the RDBs: balancing shareholder influence.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">6.2 Key challenges</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Four of the most significant challenges faced by the RDBs are (i) establishing and retaining financial
        credibility in a context reliant on private international money markets, (ii) maintaining their regional
        character, (iii) ensuring legitimacy in a changing global environment, and (iv) balancing shareholder
        influence.
      </div>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">6.2.1 <a class="item6"></a>Financial realities</h3>

        <div class="item">
          The RDBs fundamentally exist to provide financial assistance to borrowers that otherwise could not receive
          enough financing from private sources. This necessarily means that the RDBs, as with other MDBs, are
          constrained by the exigencies of money markets. As Humphrey (2016, 93) outlines at length, the ‘financial
          realities’ of global and regional money markets shape how the RDBs operate as much as shareholder influence,
          professional norms, and institutional structures. The MDBs, Humphrey continues, must ‘be run in a way that
          ensure access to capital markets,’ for potential investors routinely are less concerned with development
          outcomes than with ensuring adequate rates of return. As outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a>, credit
          rating agencies (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CRAs</abbr>) have a tremendous influence on MDBs too. Changes to
          credit ratings after the 2008 <a class="item2"></a>Global Financial Crisis (GFC) hit smaller MDBs
          particularly strongly and undoubtedly the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and IADB’s decisions to merge the balance sheets
          of their concessional arms into their ordinary capital resources (OCR) in 2015 and 2016 respectively was one
          avenue for overcoming the impact of these changes. For the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, this move tripled their equity
          and hence lending capacity. However, concessional arms have long faced political attack, and difficulty with
          replenishments was the norm since the 1990s (Ben-Artzi 2016). These sometimes came from donor states but at
          other times from non-concessional borrowers they argued that concessional arms too often see them providing
          development assistance to low-income states. This is because concessional funding comes from transferring
          profits from non-concessional resources.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Ben-Artzi’s (2016, 236) study of four of the five RDBs in this chapter – not including the EIB – concluded
          that overall they ‘function more like banks’ than development agencies, not really meeting the goals set out
          in their Articles of Agreement. Much of their lending is ‘strategic,’ preferencing borrowers that are
          unlikely to default and states with mid to high per capita incomes in their respective regions (Ben-Artzi
          2016, 240). Still, the RDBs remain an appealing – and, at times, the only – avenue for borrowers because they
          ‘offer loans at very attractive financial terms compared to what borrowing countries could generally get
          themselves from other sources’ (Humphrey 2014, 612). Further, they generally offer borrowing member states
          somewhat more voice than the World Bank does, though that varies.
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">6.2.2 <a class="item6"></a>Regional character</h3>

        <div class="item">
          The RDBs are mandated to promote regional development and they have decades of close engagement with regional
          borrowing countries. They promote regionalisation through common market integration (EIB), individual and
          collective economic and social development (IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr>), and economic
          transition to facilitate regional assimilation (EBRD). The ‘region’ is at the core of the RDBs, flowing
          normatively over into each MDB being instilled with a strong ‘regional character.’ The EIB and EBRD promote a
          European identity, the IADB sponsors a common Latin American and Caribbean community, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>
          advocates pan-Africanism, and the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> markets itself as an organisation working for the people
          of the Asia-Pacific. The challenge for the RDBs is how to balance this regional character amidst changing
          memberships, mission creep as they engage with and are influenced by non-regional stakeholders, and the
          fluidity of their regions as social constructs.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          As an illustration, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> was compelled to admit non-regional member countries in the 1980s,
          a turn it had resisted in the 1960s and 1970s as its founders desired it to be apart from the colonial legacy
          that shaped the African continent over several centuries (English and Mule 1996). Yet, as a decolonising
          region with limited capital reserves, the ‘financial realities’ of global and regional money markets had
          their impact on the MDB (Humphrey 2016, 93). Its ability to provide capital to support regional economic and
          social growth was restricted, and its chance of acquiring a AAA credit rating were significantly boosted by
          having Western member states (Humphrey 2014). During its first ten years, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> approved
          projects totalling $451 million, whereas the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> – established two years after the African MDB
          with several wealthy Global North countries – approved $3.36 billion over its first decade. After
          non-regional members joined, its authorised capital increased from $6.3 billion in 1983 to $22.3 billion in
          1987 (Babb 2009), but this came at the cost of constraining its autonomy. In the 1990s, as the
          <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s balance sheet deteriorated due to accumulating bad debts as borrowers entered arrears,
          non-regional members bailed the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> out on the condition that its Articles of Agreement were
          revised to grant non-regional stakeholders greater voice over the organisation. The US became its second
          largest shareholder (Coburn, Restivo, and Shandra 2015). The decision to expand the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s
          membership made the RDB better able to serve its region but at the cost of constraining its autonomous
          African identity and approach to development.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          A different challenge to regional identity has been created for the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> by the establishment of
          the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (<abbr>AIIB</abbr>) in 2015. Japan and China demonstrate different
          understandings of ‘Asia,’ which Cook (2015) explained as reflecting each country’s geographical position;
          China is a land power with an inland capital and ‘an East-West continental understanding of Asia.’ The
          <abbr>AIIB</abbr> members have a strong representation from Central and South Asia and the Middle East, and
          of note there are eight Middle Eastern countries in the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> that are not in the
          <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, though several Middle Eastern states expressed early interest in the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>.
          Russia is a regional member in the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> but not a member of the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, while Turkey
          is a regional member in the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and a non-regional <abbr>AsDB</abbr> member. Japan, as ‘an
          archipelagic power on the North Pacific periphery of the Eurasian landmass, has a North-South maritime
          understanding of Asia’ (Cook 2015). The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> includes 14 Pacific Island states that were not
          <a class="item2"></a><abbr>AIIB</abbr> prospective founding members, though a couple have since joined. Here
          we see a battle for leadership in Asia being played out in how MDBs are structured and how ‘region’ is
          constructed by regional powers.
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">6.2.3 <a class="item6"></a>Legitimacy</h3>

        <div class="item">
          To maintain legitimacy, the RDBs have revised their approach to development assistance, introduced new
          agencies and affiliates, and updated their establishing agreements to respond to the changing global
          environment. Legitimacy is a significant factor for all MDBs, for donors must regard concessional arms as
          viable for replenishment, money markets must see them as creditworthy, and borrowers as preferable lenders to
          other funding sources and to accept their lending schedules and reform proposals. Many of the poorest and
          smallest countries are severely limited in pursuing alternative financing options other than MDBs, but the
          RDBs, as banks, need a broad borrower base and large borrowers to provide adequate profits, which fund their
          staff and other costs. Recent changes responding to demand and legitimacy challenges include the EIB
          integrating the European Investment Fund (<a class="item2"></a>EIF) and European Fund for Strategic
          Investments (<a class="item2"></a>EFSI) in 2000 and 2014 respectively to better engage with private
          investment flows and the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and IADB merging their concessional loan windows with their OCR to
          increase equity. These expansions were likely a response to threats perceived by the creation of the
          <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and NDB but also reflect the push from the Global North to shift from grant to loan
          financing, the so-called ‘beyond aid’ or retroliberal agenda.
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">6.2.4 <a class="item6"></a>Shareholder influence</h3>

        <div class="item">
          Shareholder influence is a perennial issue for the MDBs. They are public organisations owned by their
          members, but RDBs have unequal shareholder structures with the distribution of voting rights based on
          purchased capital shares. With inequality the norm, how do the RDBs balance the interests of both small and
          large shareholders? Commonly, leading shareholders exercise considerable influence over strategic directions
          and the appointment of presidents and for the IBRD this still means the US. While the US does not play a
          formal role in the EIB, it is the largest shareholder in the IADB and EBRD, the equal largest shareholder in
          the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> alongside Japan, and the second largest in the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, behind Nigeria,
          though the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> does not effectively have a dominant shareholder. Further, in both the EIB and
          EBRD, the dominant shareholders are a group of core EU states – Germany, France, and Italy (and formerly the
          UK, which left the EIB due to Brexit).
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The significant influence of the US is felt formally via political appointees in staffing – the IADB’s
          Executive Vice President has always been an American – and informally by refusing loans to countries in
          opposition to the US, for example, the IADB was pressured during Antonio Ortiz Mena’s presidency (1971–88) to
          refuse loans to Sandinista-led Nicaragua and the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> did not lend to Vietnam for many years
          following the end of the Vietnam War (Babb 2009, 29). The US served as ‘the writer, producer, and main actor
          of the script’ (Shaw 1991, 537) in establishing the Bretton Woods baseline, a condition maintained in most of
          the RDBs.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Of the seven presidents leading the EIB, only one – Philippe Maystadt of Belgium – has not been from one of
          the four largest shareholders. Similarly, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s President has always been Japanese. The
          exception is the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, with each of its nine presidents coming from nine different countries:
          Sudan, Tunisia, Ghana, Malawi, Zambia, Senegal, Morocco, Rwanda, and Nigeria. Block voting by the
          <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s regional member countries – that today control over 59% voting power – has played a
          central role in electing its presidents. For example, Kwame Donko Fordwor of Ghana (May 1976–July 1979) was
          elected President with 50.66% of the vote after several months of political manoeuvrings by various African
          nations (Mingst 1990, 20). Further, shareholder influence emerges in project approvals and lending practices.
          Of 5,087 projects by the EIB between 1958 and 2016, Germany France, and Italy – the largest shareholders –
          were among the top four recipients, totalling 33% of all loans approved to its 28 members. Shareholder
          dominance impacts operations and borrower ownership; the EBRD and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> have little borrower
          influence, while the IADB has more, and the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> the most (Ben-Artzi 2016).
        </div>
      </section>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">6.3 <a class="item6"></a>European Investment Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The EIB was established on 1 January 1958 by the <a class="item2"></a>Treaty of Rome as an organ of the
        European Economic Community (EEC), the latter also being founded by the same treaty. As per Article 2 of the
        Treaty, the EEC and EIB were created to establish ‘a common market and… to promote… a harmonious development of
        economic activities, a continuous and balanced expansion, an increase in stability, an accelerated raising of
        the standard of living and closer relations between the [member states]’ (cited in Griffith-Jones and Tyson
        2013, 2). Gutner (2002, 68 and 219n80) outlined one unique feature of the EIB that distinguishes it from the
        other RDBs – in addition to having the lowest profile of the RDBs, ‘It prefers not to think of itself as a
        “development” institution,’ with Gutner repeatedly reminded in interviews with EIB staff ‘that “development” is
        not in the Bank’s name.’ This point of distinction was recently repeated by Gavas (2019), Co-Director of
        Development Cooperation in Europe, who compared the EIB with the EBRD: ‘In a nutshell, the EIB is the EU’s bank
        but not a development bank, while the EBRD is a development bank but not the EU’s bank.’ While avoiding
        development nomenclature, the EIB’s mandate includes financing projects for developing less developed regions,
        undertakings that cannot be entirely financed by other sources, and activities of common interest to its
        members. Further, it has the structure of an MDB and participates in several MDB cooperation forums and
        sectoral efforts like the 2016 MDB platform to coordinate on economic migration and forced displacement. In
        other words, it does not just have all the hallmarks of an MDB, it is one.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EIB is the <a class="item2"></a>EU’s bank – its aims are to further the objectives of the EU – and it has
        been the world’s largest multilateral lender and borrower. While the World Bank Group committed $60 billion in
        2015, the EIB Group approved €92 billion. Capital increases agreed in 2018 for the World Bank Group, however,
        will see its capital base expand beyond the EIB. The European RDB’s historical mandate and current lending
        practices detailed in Article 309 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU reveal influences from the IBRD
        and a focus on loans and guarantees from its own resources and capital markets. The EIB set precedents for
        later RDBs with its focus on regional development and its purposes specify that it is not-for-profit. Later
        RDBs followed the EIB’s commitment to cooperate with other investment programmes and funds.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Since the EIB’s <a class="item2"></a>establishment, it has had two main <a class="item2"></a>goals, first,
        reducing income differentials in the EEC (later EU) and, second, allocating financial resources to facilitate a
        functioning integrated market (Griffith-Jones and Tyson 2013). It initially only lent within the European
        region and its first loan was approved jointly with the IBRD in April 1959, demonstrating that the
        inter-organisational relationship between MDBs was established from their outset. The EIB authorised project
        financing outside of the <a class="item2"></a>EEC in 1962, slowly expanding activities to Asia, Africa, and
        Latin America. Still, 90% of financing is allocated to EU member countries, with the remaining 10% in 2017
        divided between Asia and Latin America (3%), the Mediterranean (3%), Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific
        (2%), Eastern Europe, Southern Caucus, and Russia (1%), and members of the European Free Trade Association:
        Switzerland, Iceland, Norway, and Lichtenstein (1%). Non-EU developing countries do sometimes request financial
        assistance from the EIB, supposedly due to its ‘trusted partner’ reputation and focus on project-based lending
        (Anonymous 2019b) – in the crowded MDF field, the EIB’s clearly defined mandate to support the EU have resulted
        in limited interest. The 2019 Wise Persons Report’s investigations into the EIB found it ‘to have little or no
        experience working with low income countries and countries with fragilities,’ exposing weaknesses in activities
        outside the EU (Wieser 2019, 23).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        On 5 June 2000, the EIB became the EIB Group when it became the majority shareholder of the EIF. The EIF
        commenced operations in 1994 as a public-private partnership to finance trans-European network infrastructure
        and promote small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Since 2000, the EIF has acted as EIB’s specialist arm for risk
        capital for <a class="item2"></a>SMEs, indicative of a growth in MDB focus on private sector financing. On 26
        November 2014, the <a class="item2"></a>EIB Group grew to include the EFSI, which mobilises private capital in
        projects of strategic importance for the EU and was designed to help the EU’s investment gap. EFSI’s activities
        are supported by a €16 billion guarantee from the EU and a €5 billion from EIB capital. EIF and EFSI operations
        broadly parallel those of the International Finance Corporation (<a class="item2"></a>IFC) and Multilateral
        Investment Guarantee Agency (<a class="item2"></a>MIGA) in the World Bank Group.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are 27 member countries in the EIB, with <a class="item2"></a>membership limited to EU members. Germany,
        France, and Italy each own 16.1% shareholding. Combined with Spain’s 9.7%, the top four shareholders control
        58% of the RDB. In contrast, the smallest five shareholders – Luxembourg, Cyprus, Latvia, Estonia, and Malta –
        each control less than 0.11%. Capital shares are determined by a member’s economic weighting in the EU in terms
        of relative size of GDP at the time of accession. The weighting is capped, however, so that France, Germany,
        and Italy retain the same share level. Due to Brexit, the UK’s former 16.1% shareholding was to be sold to
        other member countries and it will be interesting to see how that process is managed and how relative
        shareholdings are altered. Brexit has restricted lending targets by 15% to mitigate risks (Anonymous 2019b) and
        there is speculation that mid-tier shareholders may absorb shares of the UK. Current President Werner Hoyer has
        noted the damage Brexit could have on the EIB’s ability to lend, creating uncertainty for an otherwise stable
        MDB (Giles and Pickard 2018). However, Brexit may not have a drastic impact on capital, since capital invested
        is small compared to callable capital and other European states should be able to take up the capital
        relatively easily.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a>Day-to-day activities are overseen by a Management Committee led by the EIB President and
        eight Vice Presidents. Seven Presidents have led the EIB since 1958, all of whom except one have been citizens
        of the four largest shareholders – see <a class="item2">Table 6.2</a>, which also provides an indication of key
        priorities and issues under each President. Incumbent President Hoyer, who assumed office in January 2012, has
        commented on the need for the European Commission and EIB to clearly demarcate responsibilities; ‘As long as…
        we do not try to become policymakers and the European Commission does not try to play bank, we are prepared for
        more impact’ (cited in Salinger 2018). This comment demonstrates a significant difference between the EIB and
        the IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr>: the EIB is an organ within a larger regional organisation,
        whereas the Global South RDBs are standalone entities. Notably, many of the sub-regional development banks
        (SRDBs) have similar origins to the EIB, starting with the Central American Bank for Economic Integration
        (<abbr>CABEI</abbr>) in 1960 (see <a class="item2">Chapter 7</a>). Given its association with the EU, Robinson
        (2009) argues that the EIB is not just a regional bank but an actor within multi-level governance networks
        enabling the EU to operate as a regional organisation.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 6.2</em> European Investment Bank Presidents</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">President</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Pietro Campilli</td>

            <td class="item12">Italian</td>

            <td class="item12">Feb 1958–May 1959</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw administrative establishment of the EIB and approval of the first loan on 21
            April 1959. Campilli served as Minister of several different Italian ministries following the 1943
            overthrow of Fascism.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Paride Formentini</td>

            <td class="item12">Italian</td>

            <td class="item12">Jun 1959–Sep 1970</td>

            <td class="item12">First full-term President, Formentini authorised the first borrowing operation in 1961
            and project financing outside the European Community in 1962. Before becoming President, he served first as
            Deputy Director General and then Director General of the Bank of Italy between 1947 and 1959.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Yves Le Portz</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">Sep 1970–Jul 1984</td>

            <td class="item12">Supervised admission of new members including Denmark, Greece, Ireland, and the UK,
            issued first borrowing operation in <em class="calibre4">eurco</em> (a proto version of the Euro), and developed activities
            in support of the common market. Previously worked in the French finance ministry and the UN Economic and
            Social Council.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Ernst-Günther Bröder</td>

            <td class="item12">German</td>

            <td class="item12">Aug 1984–Mar 1993</td>

            <td class="item12">Encouraged integration of former Soviet states at the end of the Cold War, agreed to
            finance projects to Poland and Hungary in 1989 and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, Bulgaria, and
            Romania in 1991. Extended activities to Latin America and Asia and supported private sector development. He
            later became the first Chair of the World Bank Inspection Panel.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Sir Brian Unwin</td>

            <td class="item12">British</td>

            <td class="item12">Apr 1993–Dec 1999</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw extension of EIB’s activities to the Baltic States – Estonia, Latvia, and
            Lithuania – in 1993, membership admission of Austria, Finland, and Sweden in 1995, and first borrowing
            operation in Euros on 12 February 1997. He held many roles in the British public service, including
            Treasury and Customs and Excise.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Philippe Maystadt</td>

            <td class="item12">Belgian</td>

            <td class="item12">Mar 2000–Dec 2011</td>

            <td class="item12">EIB Group was founded following the inclusion of the EIF in June 2000. Poverty
            alleviation and sustainable growth became operational cornerstones, culminating in the adoption of EIB’s
            Environmental and Social Handbook in September 2010. Served as EIB Governor for ten years before becoming
            President and chaired the Interim Committee of the IMF after leaving the EIB.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Werner Hoyer</td>

            <td class="item12">German</td>

            <td class="item12">Jan 2012–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Pursued a special capital increase in January 2013 in response to the ongoing shocks of
            the global and Eurozone financial crises, launched the EFSI in November 2014 and the Economic Resilience
            Initiative in 2016, which was designed to support regions outside of Europe affected by the refugee
            crisis.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and EIB Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EIB’s investments impact EU policymaking and are said to have a ‘“catalytic effect”, leveraging greater
        [EU] expenditure than would otherwise occur’ (Robinson 2009, 652). This is because, in addition to financing
        loans, guarantees, microfinance, and equity investments, the EIB unlocks financing from other sources,
        including the EU budget. Further, its contribution to project costs is limited to half of the amount
        established during appraisal, differentiating it from the IBRD which can fund full project costs. EIB loans
        last between four and 20 years, with loan rates varying from project to project (Faure, Prizzon, and Rogerson
        2015). Due to its confidential relationship with partners, mirroring the EBRD’s ‘merchant bank’ model, the EIB
        does not publish details of financing terms and conditions. This lack of transparency is concerning given that
        the EIB invests taxpayer funds, which is a growing challenge as MDBs engage more extensively with the private
        sector and is another way MDBs are contributing to financialisation.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Over €1.1 trillion has been invested by the EIB in over 11,800 projects in more than 60 countries since
        commencing lending operations in 1959. Between 2000 and 2017, its annual approvals more than doubled, from
        €41.4 billion in 2000 to €83.8 billion in 2017. Its lending peaked in 2009 – €103.9 billion – during the 2008
        GFC indicating some commitments to Keynesian counter-cyclical financing, which the World Bank has only
        infrequently achieved despite the commitments to this in its Articles of Agreement. Of new loans in 2016, €33.7
        billion were for SMEs, €19.7 billion for infrastructure, €16.9 for climate change, and €13.5 billion for
        innovation and skills. Historically, transportation and credit were the sectors that received the most funding,
        totalling just over 50% of cumulative lending. Recent EIB projects include the Intesa San Paolo Midcap Loan IV,
        a €300 million line of credit project to finance eligible investments promoted by mid-cap companies in Italy –
        such financial intermediary loans further increase concerns around loan transparency. There was also the
        Aeroporto Di Roma Fiumicino Sud, a €500 million transportation project increasing capacity and operational
        efficiency of Fiumicino Airport in Italy. These indicative examples demonstrate that the EIB is a conservative
        MDB favouring investment projects, with an agenda of ‘smart’ and ‘inclusive’ growth focussed on ‘building a
        high-value, high-employment economy with innovation in multiple fields leading to new commercial activity and
        employment’ (Griffith-Jones and Tyson 2013, 5).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Gutner (2002, 68) noted close to two decades ago that the EIB does not have a ‘policy voice’ like the other
        RDBs, for its members
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          have little incentive to create an institution that tells them what to do. As a result, the EIB has no
          separate policy research arm or country lending strategies, and it does not directly promote a particular set
          of its own policy ideas or innovative types of loan conditionality.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        For several decades, the EIB often did ‘not even design or develop the projects it lends money to. <a class="item2"></a>Project promoters present project ideas to the Bank, and the Bank will evaluate projects of
        interest through an appraisal procedure’ (Gutner 2002, 123). In contrast, the World Bank was deeply engaged in
        project design from the outset, but this has led to questions about whether borrowers have ownership of their
        projects. The EIB changed during the 2000s and 2010s with the establishment of several advisory and trust fund
        facilities supporting private sector investment, public-private partnerships, and pre-investment studies. The
        EIB Group also coordinates the EIB Institute, an in-house teaching and learning institute that funds research,
        partners with academia, runs seminars and conferences, and functions as a social and cultural hub. It is
        comparable to the IBRD’s Economic Development Institute (EDI) and World Bank Institute (<a class="item2"></a>WBI), demonstrating again organisational convergence at play in the MDB system, and the way that
        MDBs aim to educate or socialise people around its world view.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the EIB is a very large bank annually approving cumulative loan amounts far exce<a class="item2"></a>eding the other RDBs combined. Its <a class="item2"></a>large capital base lends support to
        Humphrey’s (2014) argument that raising the capital base is easier for MDBs that have shareholders as
        borrowers, than for those where the major stakeholders are non-borrowers. Members as borrowers also seem to
        have ensured limited conditionality and more borrower ownership of projects. While mirroring the MDB template
        of the IBRD, it has become as much a financial investor in European SMEs, infrastructure, and climate projects
        as a development bank, though it is not the only MDB that operates along this model and the World Bank’s
        <a class="item2"></a>Maximising Finance for Development (MFD) agenda seems to take inspiration from the EIB.
        Still, it funds technical assistance to get regional cooperation projects going and for projects in Europe’s
        less developed regions, so there it operates more like a standard development bank, mobilising finance for
        public goods and where the private sector under-invests (Anonymous 2019b). The EIB’s organisational priorities
        are clear: financing loans that balance and stabilise the EU’s internal market and are of common interest to EU
        members. Griffith-Jones and Tyson (2013, 17) list the <a class="item2"></a>‘critical enablers’ of the EIB as a
        successful MDB as: its AAA rating paired with a non-profit rationale enabling long-dated, low-cost, and
        large-scale financing, coupled with its intertwined position within the EU enabling support for the high-level
        strategy for European integration. It is the model of what other regional integration-based MDBs wanted to
        become, though in most cases the regional integration projects have collapsed.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">6.4 <a class="item6"></a>Inter-American Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The background <a class="item2"></a>history of the IADB is the product of complicated efforts to foster Latin
        American regionalism dating back to the late 1800s (Barria and Roper 2004), as discussed in <a class="item2">Chapter 2</a>. There was a further push to create a body for the region from 1939 which again proved
        unsuccessful, in part because the proposed body was far broader than just a development bank and because the US
        withdrew its support. The Organisation of American States (OAS), founded in April 1948, organised the 1957
        Economic Conference of OAS in Buenos Aires, Argentina, which (again) proposed that the Inter-American Economic
        and Social Council form a specialised committee to investigate the feasibility of an inter-American financial
        organisation. The US supported the proposal in 1958, in part because of Vice President Richard Nixon’s hostile
        reception on a tour of Latin America and of the increasing success of Cuban revolutionaries (Barria and Roper
        2004, 623, Tussie 1995, 18–19). Interestingly, one other trigger for the IADB’s formation was as a
        ‘counterweight’ to the IBRD’s monopolistic position as a ‘market player rather than a market maker or
        facilitator’ (Phillips 2009, 17). Even investors on Wall Street were concerned by the unrivalled presence of
        the World Bank. Further, countries in the region ‘felt that the World Bank was not paying enough attention to
        Latin America, was uninterested in regional integration projects, and was too concerned with past defaults’
        (Krasner 1981, 305). To illustrate, the IBRD approved $170.9 million to Latin America and the Caribbean in 1957
        and 1958, while Asia and the Middle East received $516.9 million. IBRD loans of the time to Latin America also
        focussed on electric power and transportation, not domestic industry and social projects as were wanted by
        countries from the region (Humphrey 2016, 98).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Many Latin American and Caribbean countries during the 1950s felt their region lacked suitable investment to
        meet development financing needs. The IADB emerged from talks favouring the <a class="item2"></a>state-led
        development model of Raúl Prebisch and the UN Economic Commission for Latin America (UN-ECLA). The IADB was
        seen as a crucial link in resource transfers to overcome market failures, weak private sectors, and
        insufficient capital investment (Tussie 1995). That the US accepted these arguments confirms Rapley’s (2002, 1)
        position that, ‘[i]n the early post-war period, development thought like conventional economic wisdom, was
        really neither left nor right. There existed a broad consensus that economies need more state intervention than
        they have been given in the past.’ The IADB was finally established in 1959, when the <a class="item2"></a>OAS
        approved its Articles of Agreement, which is quite like the IBRD’s.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IADB was mandated to foster <a class="item2"></a>economic and social development in the developing member
        countries of the region by promoting both individual country growth and collective regional integration. The
        concept of a ‘Latin American and Caribbean region’ is relatively less contested and more geographically
        determined compared to the far more contentious and fluidly constructed ‘Asian’ or ‘Asia-Pacific’ region (Bull
        and Bøås 2003, 250). The US suggested including a concessional lending arm in the establishing agreement – the
        Fund for Special Operations (FSO) – as a parallel to the International Development Association (<a class="item2"></a>IDA), which was only established in 1960. Further, the establishing agreement ‘permitted more
        flexibility than the World Bank to make loans directly to private industry without requiring a government
        guarantee, an important demand of Latin American countries intent on developing their domestic industrial base’
        (Humphrey 2016, 99), a territory the World Bank was, in fact, not willing to traverse. Still, in its early
        years, it actually lent mostly to sovereign states for housing, education, and sanitation (Ben-Artzi 2016).
        Technical assistance has an explicit place in the IADB’s functions, which was not the case in the earlier MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are now 48 member countries in the IADB: 26 regional developing member countries, 20 non-regional member
        countries, and the US and Canada. As per its Articles, each member country holds 135 votes plus one for each
        share of ordinary capital stock held. The US is the largest shareholder with 30% voting power (enabling it to
        veto <a class="item2"></a>FSO decisions, though not ordinary capital loans), while regional developing
        countries collectively hold over 50% voting power. However, the US exercises considerable influence due to the
        RDB’s headquarters being in Washington, DC, its Executive Vice President always being an American citizen (Babb
        2009, 27–28), and it employs a ‘large percentage of American citizens’ (Ben-Artzi 2016, 92). If the US does not
        support a proposal, it is unlikely to get to the voting stage (Ben-Artzi 2016).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The Board has 14 members and they meet weekly and are fairly active (Ben-Artzi 2016). This may be part of the
        way that it keeps it distinct regional characteristics. Regional states as collective majority shareholders
        perceive themselves as decisive in decisions, leaders in development finance and donor coordination, and the
        IADB President has evolved into a ‘regional statesperson’ (Nelson 2000, 407). Of the regional member states,
        Argentina and Brazil dominate with close to 11.4% of voting power each, followed by Mexico with 7.3%. Most
        remaining regional <a class="item2"></a>member countries own less than half a per cent each. Although not
        greatly influential during its early decades, the IADB – just like the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and <abbr>AsDB</abbr>
        – has become a powerful regional actor (Bull and Bøås 2003).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Four Presidents have led the IADB (see <a class="item2">Table 6.3</a>). Elected for five-year terms and able to
        be re-elected, the President is supported by an Executive Vice President and three Vice Presidents: for
        Countries, for Sectors and Knowledge, and for Finance and Administration. The President has always been chosen
        from a regional member country, unlike the IBRD and <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s appointment of American and Japanese
        leaders. In practice, the US, Argentina, and Brazil have informally picked the presidents (Lopes 2019).
        Reflecting the World Bank’s MFD agenda, incumbent President Luis Alberto Moreno argued in 2017 that the IADB
        must become ‘bigger’ in its annual financial approvals and more flexible to respond to its heterogeneous
        region. A new president is scheduled to be elected in September 2020 and in June the US broke protocol by
        nominating an American, Mauricio Claver-Carone, a Trump Administration appointee in the National Security
        Council and ‘anti-Castro warrior’ who seems have little expertise on the region outside Cuba (Waldron 2020).
        But the US has Brazilian backing so may yet prevail.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 6.3</em> Inter-American Development Bank Presidents</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">President</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Felipe Herrera</td>

            <td class="item12">Chilean</td>

            <td class="item12">1960–1970</td>

            <td class="item12">Economist, lawyer, academic, and political socialist, Herrera built a ‘bank of ideas’
            accepting both structuralist and monetarist economists.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Antonio Ortiz Mena</td>

            <td class="item12">Mexican</td>

            <td class="item12">1971–1988</td>

            <td class="item12">Mexico’s former Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mena increased lending tenfold
            and focused on infrastructure and heavy industry. He resigned before his term ended amid suspicions US
            President Ronald Reagan was intervening in the IADB’s internal affairs through Secretary of State George P.
            Schultz’s attempt to block of a $58 million loan to Sandinista Nicaragua.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Enrique Valentín Iglesias García</td>

            <td class="item12">Uruguayan / Spanish</td>

            <td class="item12">1988–2005</td>

            <td class="item12">Focused on sustainable development, poverty reduction, competitiveness, state
            modernisation, social development, and equity. He also responded to antagonistic US demands for an
            organisational restructuring and established the IIC and MIF.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Luis Alberto Moreno</td>

            <td class="item12">Colombian / American</td>

            <td class="item12">2005–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">A former Colombian Ambassador to the US, Moreno commenced an organisational
            transformation and generational change. He spearheaded a record increase of women in leadership positions
            and improved transparency and accountability.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and IADB Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The World Bank Group, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> all have concessional <a class="item2"></a>lending facilities created after their establishment and operating as separate legal entities. The
        IADB’s soft loan window, the FSO, was built in and began operations when the Bank was founded in 1959, making
        it the first concessional lending body of the MDBs (Babb 2009, 27, Tussie 1995, 5). The purpose of the FSO is
        rather vague: ‘the making of loans on terms and conditions appropriate for dealing with special circumstances
        arising in specific countries or with respect to specific projects’ (IaDB 1996, Article IV, Section 1). The IDA
        is clearer in providing concessional terms to less developed member states but both organisations probably took
        the idea of replenishments from SUNFED (see <a class="item2">Chapter 3</a>). The Articles allow for financing
        FSO operations from the income derived from IADB operations, though it has only made minimal allocations over
        the years (Humphrey 2014). This is because borrowing states oppose the reallocation as a transfer from some
        borrowers to others. Transfers to the IDA are not in the IBRD Articles; they occur but have been opposed by
        many IBRD borrowers. This is a case of ideas flowing from an RDB to the World Bank rather than the reverse as
        generally highlighted in this chapter. In 2016, the IADB agreed to effectively close the FSO, transferring its
        resources to ordinary capital, though it did create a new blended loan instrument that five member countries
        have access to. This followed a similar <abbr>AsDB</abbr> decision in 2015 and, as noted earlier, is part of a
        donor push to limit grants, expand loans, and achieve harder financing terms for Global South countries.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the World Bank and EIB, there is an IADB Group, which comprises the IADB, Inter-American Investment
        Corporation (IIC), and Multilateral Investment Fund (MIF). The IIC commenced work in 1989, though the
        establishing agreement became effective in March 1986. It finances <a class="item2"></a>private sector
        investment projects without government guarantees, and so it is comparable to the World Bank’s IFC. The IIC
        approved 162 projects totalling $2.24 billion in 2016, with sectoral approvals divided into financial markets
        (41.3%), energy (31.2%), science and technology (7.5%), transport (6.9%), agriculture and rural development
        (3.9%), and other (9.2%). In ‘other,’ the <a class="item2"></a>IIC mostly funds projects supporting private
        sector financing partnerships, securitisation, trusts, and development banks. This growth in IFC-equivalents
        funding financial intermediaries is a contemporary trend in the MDBs. The <a class="item2"></a>MIF was launched
        in 1993 to provide technical assistance for private sector growth. It approved $86 million in 2016, with an
        active portfolio of over 500 projects supporting micro and small private business development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IADB was a marginal development financier up until the 1980s under President Antonio Ortiz Mena. The vast
        increase in petrodollars after the 1973 and 1979 oil price shocks saw large commercial loan flows into the
        region, made possible by the removal of restrictions on finance ministers to offer government guarantees on
        commercial loans (Scheman 1997, 86). However, the 1982 <a class="item2"></a>debt crisis ended private capital
        flows to the region, and public lending was supported by structural adjustment. Compelled by a changing
        political climate and the impact of US President Ronald Reagan’s neoliberal turn, the IADB moved away from
        social sector lending and became ‘closely identified with the World Bank’s economic liberalisation and
        integration agenda’ (Nelson 2000, 407). Robin Broad, as an international economist working on the World Bank
        and IADB at the US Treasury Department, ‘was struck by the certainty of political appointees at Treasury about
        the unquestioned correctness of [structural adjustment] policies’ (Broad and Cavanagh 2009, 7). This situation
        was heightened by the close proximity of the IBRD and IADB headquarters in Washington, DC (Culpeper 1997, 115),
        and the centrality of the World Bank and IADB to the Baker Plan for debt relief proposed in 1985 (Babb 2009,
        128). Further, Tussie (1995, 96) notes that President Iglesias (1988–2005) ‘warned against “counterproductive
        dichotomies” and promoted a pragmatic convergence of ideas’ under the Washington Consensus. During the 1980s,
        the IADB’s annual lending increased to help with its role in debt and averaged $2.3 billion (the IBRD’s average
        per annum was $12.3 billion). A large capital increase in 1988, likely a reward for its support in implementing
        structural adjustment, further enhanced lending capacity. The 1988 increase was overseen by newly elected
        President Enrique Valentín Iglesias García and was $26 billion, followed by an additional $40 billion in 1994,
        meaning its capital base reached $101 billion (Scheman 1997, 87). Further, like the IBRD, it has been
        consistently building up its reserves, another key determinant of capacity to borrow on financial markets.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Thus, the IADB’s fortunes changed in the 1990s. Lending dramatically increased in 1991 and since 1994 it has
        been Latin America and the Caribbean’s main source of development financing, only recently rivalled by the
        Development Bank of Latin America (<abbr>CAF</abbr>) (see <a class="item2">Chapter 7</a>). From 1994 to 2008,
        the IADB approved over $108.6 billion in loans to the region, totalling 50% of all multilateral lending.
        Notably too, from 1998 to 2009, the IADB was able to loan at a slightly lower interest rate than the IBRD,
        despite not having the backing of as many Northern states (Humphrey 2014). This may have been because of
        growing competition from a range of private and public financiers; on the public side, Chinese and Brazilian
        development finance increased substantially in the region and the <abbr>CAF</abbr> became more of a competitor.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the IBRD, the IADB sought a capital increase after the 2008 GFC, but it obtained quite a bit less than it
        sought, with the US and Europeans reportedly opposed to higher contributions, while borrowers sought a greater
        increase. As with the World Bank, the reluctance to increase paid-in capital has resulted in pressure to
        increase earnings to build up reserves, as a substitute for capital. The transfer of FSO resources to OCR also
        increased its capitalisation. As of the end of 2018, IADB’s subscribed capital reached $176.8 billion, while
        its paid-in capital was $11.9 billion. With many wealthy non-borrowing countries reinforcing its AAA credit
        rating, the IADB is comparable to the IBRD ‘in relation to capitalisation ratios and the use of reserves to
        build equity as opposed to paid-in capital’ (Humphrey 2014, 634).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1961 and 2017, IADB OCR and FSO approvals totalled $266.8 billion, with FSO loans making up just $20
        billion. The four largest recipients of OCR loans were Brazil (21%), Mexico (16%), Argentina (16%), and
        Colombia (9%). Approvals per annum increased significantly during the GFC, with $5.3 billion approved in 2000
        while $15.5 billion was approved in 2009 (IADB 2010). In 1999, they started using country groupings to organise
        loans. Originally, they had four, but it is now two, with ‘Group I’ comprising the higher per capita income
        states that get 65% of loans, while ‘Group II’ gets 35%. In 2017, approvals included 90 sovereign-guaranteed
        loans totalling $11.4 billion, divided into 73 investment projects ($7.9 billion) and 17 policy-based loans
        ($3.4 billion) (IADB 2017). The 90 sovereign-guaranteed <a class="item2"></a>loans focussed on infrastructure
        and the environment (51%), institutions for development (38%), the social sector (8%), and trade and regional
        integration (2%). Thus, its portfolio appears to have matched the general shift back to infrastructure that has
        been happening across the sector.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Beyond financial assistance, the IADB Group manages several advisory facilities for project preparation. These
        facilities include the Project Preparation Facility that provides up to $1.5 million in project preparation
        financing, an Infrastructure Fund that assists public, private, and mixed entities develop and prepare
        infrastructure projects, and the <a class="item2"></a>Regional Infrastructure Integration Fund that provides
        technical assistance for the preparation of strategic integration projects. <a class="item2"></a>Project
        preparation has long been a challenging issue for the World Bank (Bazbauers 2018), and the number of trust
        funds on this topic demonstrates that IADB faces the same challenge.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the IADB was the first Global South MDB, whereas the EIB emerged from the Global North. While the
        US is the leading shareholder controlling nearly 20% voting power more than the next largest shareholder, the
        RDB has legitimacy in the region and helped set groundwork for structures and institutional approaches adopted
        by the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and <abbr>AsDB</abbr>.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">6.5 <a class="item6"></a>African Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <abbr>AfDB</abbr> is Africa’s leading development finance organisation. As per its Articles of Agreement,
        its mandate is to ‘contribute to the sustainable economic development and social progress of its regional
        members individually and jointly’ (<abbr>AfDB</abbr> 2016) and it follows the purposes and functions model
        established by the IBRD, although notably it does not mention guarantees only direct financing. Like the IADB,
        it promotes regional integration and individual country growth. It pursues its mandate through project and
        programme lending, resource mobilisation, technical assistance, and private investment promotion in Africa and
        has become a beacon of pan-Africanism (Babb 2009, 30).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The RDB’s origins can be traced to a report published in 1957 by the <a class="item2"></a>Council of Europe
        Study Group for the Development of Africa, which recommended the formation of a Bank for African Development.
        The Tubman-Nkrumah-Touré Conference of <a class="item2"></a>1958, named for the then Presidents of Liberia,
        Ghana, and Guinea, held in Saniquelle, Liberia, announced a commitment to building bodies for regional
        integration and solidarity. These proclamations took place amid the decolonisation of most of the African
        continent during the mid- to late 1950s and 1960s; it was a point of significance to establish an ‘African
        bank’ independent from former colonial powers. Robert Kwaku Gardiner, the former Ghanaian Minister of Economic
        Planning, commented that the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> ‘is one of a number of continental institutions that African
        governments have set up to provide assistance to indigenous organs to enable member countries to free
        themselves from the grip of colonial dependence’ (cited in Fordwor 1981, ix).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        After several <a class="item2"></a>conferences in 1960, including the <a class="item2"></a>All-African Peoples
        Conference and the <a class="item2"></a>Second Conference of Independent African States, the UN Economic
        Commission for Africa (<a class="item2"></a>UN-ECA) – at the request of African nations – coordinated studies
        for an African development bank. The in-principle decision to create such a bank was made in March 1962.
        Concurrently, the Committee of Nine – a thinktank made up of financial experts and economists from Cameroon,
        Ethiopia, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, Sudan, Tanganyika, and Zanzibar – engaged with African and non-African
        states to propose recommendations on its financial and administrative structure (Ajomo 1976). Thus, despite the
        early involvement of the Council of Europe, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> was largely an African initiative. The
        Agreement Establishing the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> was signed on 14 August 1963 in Khartoum, Sudan, after two years
        of consultation and preparation; it became effective on 10 September 1964. The first Board of Governors meeting
        was held in November 1964 and it commenced operations on 1 July 1966.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are 80 member countries in the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>: 54 regional and 26 non-regional shareholders. The
        regional shareholders include every recognised African mainland and island state, whereas the non-regionals are
        far more disparate, including the US and wealthy European, Asian, Middle Eastern, and Latin American countries.
        Regional members control roughly 59% of voting power, while non-regionals control 41%. As of December 2019,
        regional voting power was led by Nigeria (9.4%), Egypt (5.7%), South Africa (5.1%), and Algeria (4.3%).
        Non-regional voting power was led by the US (6.7%), Japan (5.6%), Germany (4.2%), and Canada (3.9%). China is
        also a member, but with only 1.2% voting power. Unlike in the IADB, the US is only the second largest
        shareholder, behind Nigeria. To become an <abbr>AfDB</abbr> member, non-regionals must first become members of
        the Bank’s concessional arm: the African Development Fund (<abbr>AfDF</abbr>). Compared to the World Bank and
        other RDBs, <abbr>AfDB</abbr> voting power is more diffuse, meaning that no one country can effectively
        dominate formal decision-making.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AfDB</abbr> has always advocated a regional ‘African identity,’ much more so than the IADB or
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. Up until the 1950s, except for Liberia, Ethiopia, and Egypt, the African continent was
        either under European colonial rule or, as in South Africa, living under apartheid. Its recent history of
        oppression led the fledgling organisation to initially restrict membership to independent African states,
        prohibiting non-regional entrants. At the outset, it was proposed
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          that the Board of Governors, the Board of Directors, the President, and the top management of the Bank would
          be wholly African. The memory of colonial domination was too recent, and for many too bitter, to countenance
          new ties to the North.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (English and Mule 1996, 20)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        This approach made the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> unique. Its ‘African identity,’ however, was tempered during the 1960s
        and 1970s by a split between francophone African states and other African countries, with the smaller
        francophone states determined to maintain their diplomatic relationship with France, while mitigating the
        influence of larger members like Nigeria (English and Mule 1996, 20). While an exemplar of pan-Africanism,
        ideological and strategic differences between African leaders and countries translated into emerging tensions:
        ‘Beneath the alleged unity of the [Organisation of African Unity] were acute ideological differences between
        African countries’ (Biney 2019, 182).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>governance structure has ‘produced a particularly active role for
        the Board of Directors. With no one country claiming the right to nominate the President, his or her
        re-election depends to a large extent on satisfying as many’ Directors as possible (English and Mule 1996, 2).
        Given the diffusion of voting power between <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s members, presidential elections have been
        contentious, with competing regional states alleging ‘favouritism’ and efforts to undermine consensus
        leadership (English and Mule 1996, 22–24). <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s governance has thus tended to shift between
        consensus decision-making and political bargaining by coalitions, far more so than the other RDBs (Shaw 1991,
        542). There is an informal understanding the Presidents will rotate between the three broad linguistic and
        geographical groupings of the continent: Arabic, Anglophone, and Francophone (Ben-Artzi 2016). There have been
        nine Presidents to date, all from regional member states and <a class="item2">Table 6.4</a> outlines their
        priorities and achievements. The incumbent President is Akinwumi Ayodeji Adesina of Nigeria, who assumed duties
        in September 2015.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 6.4</em> African Development Bank Presidents</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">President</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Mamoun Beheiry</td>

            <td class="item12">Sudanese</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 1964–Aug 1970</td>

            <td class="item12">Governor of the Central Bank of Sudan and member of the Committee of Nine, Beheiry
            strove to establish the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> as an efficient and well-governed bank, while attempting to
            address growing regional political pressures.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Abdelwahad Labidi</td>

            <td class="item12">Tunisian</td>

            <td class="item12">Aug 1970–May 1976</td>

            <td class="item12">Set and met a $25 million lending target per year over three years and intensified
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s contacts with, and search for, business connections. Special focus directed to Sahelian
            countries, humanitarian assistance, and long-term food security financing.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Kwame Donko Fordwor</td>

            <td class="item12">Ghanaian</td>

            <td class="item12">May 1976–Jul 1979</td>

            <td class="item12">Highly controversial, he was challenged by the Executive Directors as acting as an
            influential <abbr>AfDB</abbr> ‘player’ taking unilateral action and ‘not a neutral participant envisaged by
            economic technocrats’ (Mingst, 1990, p. 21). Tensions escalated, leading to his forced resignation.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Goodall Gondwe</td>

            <td class="item12">Malawian</td>

            <td class="item12">1979–1980</td>

            <td class="item12">A ‘caretaker’ presidency in the fallout of Fordwor’s resignation.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Wila D. Mung-omba</td>

            <td class="item12">Zambian</td>

            <td class="item12">Jun 1980–May 1985</td>

            <td class="item12">Increased the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s capital position from $1 billion to $8 billion, net
            income from $2 million to $75 million, and achieved a AAA credit rating.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Babacar N’diaye</td>

            <td class="item12">Senegalese</td>

            <td class="item12">May 1985–Aug 1995</td>

            <td class="item12">Noted pan-Africanist, oversaw a large capital increase to $23.3 billion, established the
            first private sector development unit, advocated policy-based, structural adjustment lending over project
            lending, and appointed <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s first female Vice President for Operations.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Omar Kabbaj</td>

            <td class="item12">Moroccan</td>

            <td class="item12">Aug 1995–Aug 2005</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw major organisational reforms in 1996 and 2002 to re-establish the
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s credibility after the problems of structural adjustment. Restricted the number of times
            a president could be re-elected; reformed procedures for staff selection; improved loan oversight,
            monitoring, and evaluation; emphasised country-led programs; and, strengthened country studies, reports,
            and analytical work.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Donald Kaberuka</td>

            <td class="item12">Rwandan</td>

            <td class="item12">Sep 2005–Aug 2015</td>

            <td class="item12">Emphasised private sector and infrastructure development and regional integration.
            During his tenure, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> became Africa’s premier financial institution. He also improved
            accountability and transparency mechanisms and emphasised selectivity and focus in lending operations.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Akinwumi Ayodeji Adesina</td>

            <td class="item12">Nigerian</td>

            <td class="item12">Sep 2015–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Adesina adopted a new Development and Business Model in April 2016 to align the
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr> with its Ten-Year Strategy 2013–22 for achieving inclusive and green growth and the High
            5s priorities: Light Up and Power Africa, Feed Africa, Industrialise Africa, Integrate Africa, and Improve
            the Quality of Life for the People of Africa. He faced an official probe in 2020 regarding whistle blower
            allegations of nepotism and mismanagement; initial review cleared him, but an international review was
            appointed in July.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and <abbr>AfDB</abbr> Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Paralleling the expansion of the World Bank, within its first decade the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> grew to become a
        Group through the launch of the <abbr>AfDF</abbr> and Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF). The <abbr>AfDF</abbr> is
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s concessional lending arm. It was agreed to in 1972 and established by President Abdelwahad
        Labidi in November 1974. Between 1974 and 2014, it invested $45 billion using finances replenished every three
        years by donor countries. It arose because <abbr>AfDB</abbr> loans at commercial interest rates (though lower
        than most states could access on their own) requiring on-time repayment were not viable for a number of African
        nations and many of the poorest African members did not qualify for OCR loans (Coburn, Restivo, and Shandra
        2015, 277). In its functions and operations, it was copying the trend set by the IDA and FSO. The NTF was built
        in 1976 by an agreement between the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and Nigeria to provide concessional financing to eligible
        low-income members. It began operations with $80 million and that increased to $253 million by 2012,
        prioritising agricultural loans. The <abbr>AfDF</abbr> and NTF were useful to the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, increasing
        financial approvals during its early decades when it was strongly constrained by its limited capital reserves
        and many of its member countries did not qualify for non-concessional financing.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        By the late 1970s, in the wake of the oil price shocks, the constraints of <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s limited capital
        base became too great and it began efforts to invite non-regional countries to become members (Culpeper 1997,
        31, Mingst 1990, 13). Its initial authorised capital stock was only $370 million and annual approvals averaged
        $21 million in the early 1970s, compared to the IADB approving an annual average of $685 million and
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> approving $272 million (English and Mule 1996, 10). As Babb (2009, 30) remarks, the
        ‘<abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s members came to the conclusion that it was better to sacrifice some measure of autonomy in
        order to build a bigger and more influential bank.’ To build the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s reputation and role as a
        leading regional lender, its Board of Governors approved in-principle the admission of non-regional members in
        1977 and amended its Articles in 1982. Non-regional members were first admitted in 1987 and this saw
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s authorised capital increase from $6.3 billion in 1983 to $22.3 billion in 1987.
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and <abbr>AfDF</abbr> loan approvals consequently increased, from $1.7 billion approved
        between 1979 and 1981 to $8.8 billion between 1991 and 1993 (Babb 2009, 31). As its credit rating rallied, the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> began to invest in and borrow from international capital markets. This pragmatic move by the
        Governors demonstrates the financial power of the Global North and its finance markets, and the limited
        capacity of a development banking model to challenge it. Indeed, a neo-Gramscian analysis says it shows the
        disciplinary financial power of the Global North.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, in its early decades the African RDB mostly lent for agriculture and
        infrastructure. It reluctantly introduced structural adjustment loans in the 1980s after pressure imposed by
        newly admitted non-regional members, specifically the US (Pandolfelli and Shandra 2013, 340). The
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> was concerned with being ‘IMF-ised’ and rather than attach policy conditionalities to loans,
        it preferred to inform potential borrowers that failure to implement reforms would make future loan approvals
        more difficult (Mingst 1990, 74). Nonetheless, lending increased significantly from 1985 and close to half of
        loan approvals were policy-based in 1987, up from negligible levels in preceding years and they resembled IMF
        and World Bank structural adjustment packages. A lack of in-house expertise in adjustment lending led the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> to follow the Bretton Woods siblings, along with pressure by the US, to coordinate more
        closely with the IBRD (Pandolfelli and Shandra 2013, 341–2).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In the 1990s, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> fell into difficult times due to accumulating bad debts as its borrowers
        entered arrears and regional economic stagnation limited new loans (Coburn, Restivo, and Shandra 2015, 278).
        Lending declined from 1993 and the Bank’s recently acquired AAA credit rating was downgraded to AA+. Grant and
        subsidised loans from non-regional members prevented default on <abbr>AfDB</abbr> loans (Bulow and Rogoff
        2005), on the condition that the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> commit more resources to structural adjustment lending,
        alter voting shares to increase non-regional voting power from 23% to 40%, and modify voting rules to require a
        70% majority on decisions, granting non-regional states an effective veto (Babb 2009, 31). This forcefully
        demonstrates how Global South initiatives can be overwhelmed by Northern financial discipline. Further, it was
        long regarded as having problems with inadequate country offices, lack of technical expertise, in particular
        project preparation, and inefficiency and corruption (Ben-Artzi 2016).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Following an attempted coup d’état in Côte d’Ivoire in 2002 and a rapid deterioration in the country’s
        stability, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s headquarters were relocated from Abidjan to Tunis, Tunisia, where it
        remained between 2003 and 2014, before returning to its original host country. Interestingly, this transition
        period coincided with a rapid improvement in the strength of the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> as an MDB. It resumed
        operations within just three months of moving ‘over a thousand personnel and several tons of vital documents’
        (Akin-Olugbade 2003, 738) and managed to exceed the previous few years annual <a class="item2"></a>lending
        commitments, restore its AAA credit rating not held since 1995, and launch its first $1 billion global bond
        (Akin-Olugbade 2003, 738). Though, rather than the move, the Bank’s revived fortunes need to be understood in
        relation to the global commodities boom and its positive impact on African growth as well as growing Chinese
        investment in the continent and organisational reforms initiated by President Omar Kabbaj (1995–2005) and
        continued by Donald Kaberuka (2005–15).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AfDB</abbr> returned from an uncertain future to become in the 2000s and 2010s Africa’s leading
        financial institution. Under incumbent President Akinwumi Adesina, who assumed office in September 2015, the
        African RDB has pursued the High 5s agenda, outlining five <a class="item2"></a>operational priorities: Light
        Up and Power Africa, Feed Africa, Industrialise Africa, Integrate Africa, and Improve the Quality of Life for
        the People of Africa (<abbr>AfDB</abbr> 2018). Aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (<a class="item2"></a>SDGs), the Higher 5s agenda promotes green growth, infrastructural development, and regional
        integration, underpinned by the central message that African development requires greater private sector
        mobilisation, which the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> argues it is positioned to catalyse. Note the emergence of a strong
        emphasis on the private sector for MDB investments, while the infrastructure agenda can be linked to Chinese
        influence on the subsequent re-focussing of the World Bank and other MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the World Bank, <abbr>AfDB</abbr> Group assistance is divided into three <a class="item2"></a>categories
        of eligibility depending on income levels: <abbr>AfDB</abbr>-eligible only, <abbr>AfDF</abbr>-eligible only,
        and a blend of <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and <abbr>AfDF</abbr> resources. Morocco, Tunisia, Nigeria, South Africa, and
        Egypt have historically been the largest recipients of <abbr>AfDB</abbr> project approvals, receiving 55% of
        all loans and grants. Cumulative Group lending highlights that it is still a small RDB approving $121 billion
        between 1967 and 2016. In contrast, the IADB committed $267 billion from 1961 to 2017. The African RDB approved
        5,279 projects between 1967 and 2016, which means the average loan size has also been quite small at just over
        $50 million. The IBRD’s average loan size was $100 million up until the mid-1990s and their size involved a
        ‘trade-off between the quantity and quality of lending’ (Ranis 1997, 86). For the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, given the
        politics around its lending programme, the small size of loans is unlikely to indicate a greater focus on
        quality. It does reflect the Bank’s small capital base, the relatively small economies of many borrowers, and
        the history of default by some states.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the IBRD and IADB, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> Group offers a range of technical and advisory services and has
        developed several trust funds, such as the <a class="item2"></a>South-South Cooperation Trust Fund, which is a
        technical assistance initiative the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and Brazil signed in March 2011 to build partnerships for
        knowledge exchange. It launched the African Development Institute (<abbr>AfDI</abbr>) in 1973 to enhance
        lending operations. Through knowledge exchange, the <abbr>AfDI</abbr> builds policy dialogue and development
        management in Africa. In 2010, the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>AfDI</abbr> was reoriented to become the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s capacity building point-of-contact, delivering face-to-face and e-learning courses and
        seminars, research, and capacity and strategic cooperation seminars. It is broadly equivalent to the World
        Bank’s WBI.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> was the first Global South-controlled MDB, but because of several factors –
        including regional member financial situations, global economic changes, and isomorphic pressures – it had to
        embrace more of the global MDB order and resultantly became more influenced by the Global North, directly – in
        the case of the US – and indirectly – in the case of broader MDF approaches. Yet, the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> has
        grown from a minor and uncertain MDB to become Africa’s leading multilateral financial organisation, setting
        standards on <a class="item2"></a>regional development both practically and intellectually.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">6.6 <a class="item6"></a>Asian Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        As the IADB and <abbr>AfDB</abbr> were founded, calls came from Asia-Pacific countries – including Japan,
        Thailand, Sri Lanka, and India – that an Asian RDB should be formed to transfer financial resources and support
        regional cooperation and integration (Nakao 2017). There was growing dismay from Asia-Pacific countries that
        the World Bank’s share of lending to the region was inadequate to meet its needs and that its procedures were
        cumbersome. Japan in particular was concerned about the IBRD’s political dominance by the US and Europe and
        that this curtailed the capacity of the region to effectively provide a voice in the institution (Kellerman
        2019). Japan was interested in establishing an Asian RDB in 1962, as it viewed states in the Asia-Pacific as a
        vital source of raw material, food, and markets for exports and foreign investment (Kappagoda 1995, 14); an MDB
        was a more neutral channel for investment for a country that had only two decades before attempted to occupy
        much of the region through force. While the US originally opposed the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s formation, it came to
        support it – as usual <a class="item2"></a>Cold War geopolitics overcame its concern that an Asian RDB would
        undermine its influence in the region, much like the IADB (Kappagoda 1995, 14). Deepening US involvement in the
        Vietnam War led to the position that an economically strong Asia-Pacific would be better able to resist
        perceived Soviet and Chinese expansionism (Nakao 2017).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In March 1963, the UN Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (UN-E<abbr>CAF</abbr>E) proposed a
        resolution to establish an Asia-Pacific development bank. The Agreement Establishing the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>,
        referred to as its Charter, sets its purpose as fostering ‘economic growth and co-operation in the region of
        Asia and the Far East… and to contribute to the acceleration of the process of economic development of the
        developing member countries in the region, collectively and individually’ (<abbr>AsDB</abbr> 1967). The
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> mirrored earlier MDBs closely from its inception, with the first President Takeshi Watanabe
        attending meetings held by the IBRD and IADB ‘to gather information about how they were run’ before the Asian
        RDB began operations (McCawley 2012, 51). The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> opened its doors on 19 December 1966 with 19
        regional and 12 non-regional members, a significant difference from the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s initial
        regional-only membership, and its initial focus – given the region’s agricultural orientation – was food
        production and rural development (McCawley 2012, 75), though it quickly turned to infrastructure too.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The ‘most obvious factor distinguishing’ the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> from other RDBs ‘is its strong <a class="item2"></a>Japanese influence’ (Babb 2009, 29). It’s history and governance structure are interwoven with
        Japan’s organisational and regional leadership, from the appointment of Japanese nationals to positions of
        importance to Japan’s initial financial contributions (Rathus 2008). From senior management to voting capacity,
        Japan is the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s most influential regional member. In fact, studies have argued that all
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> projects ‘require Japanese support; otherwise, they do not even proceed to the Board of
        Directors for approval’ (Lim and Vreeland 2013, 44). However, the US has equal shareholdings and Ben-Artzi
        (2016) noted the strong tensions between the two, in particular over visions for economic development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are 67 member countries in the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>: 48 regional shareholders and 19 non-regional. Regional
        members control over 65% voting power and non-regionals close to 35%. As of 2019, Japan and the US are the
        equal largest shareholders, with 15.6% voting power each, which is an increase from 2015 when they both had
        around 12.7%. This power structure is unique with two hegemons and little borrower influence (Ben-Artzi 2016).
        China only joined the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> in 1986 but by 2016 was its third largest borrower behind India and
        Indonesia. China also has the third largest voting share, which jumped from 5.5% in 2016 to 6.4% in 2019, with
        India a close fourth at 6.3%. Both China and India are active in <abbr>AsDB</abbr> governance (O’Keeffe, Pryke,
        and Wurf 2017), which is a change from the traditional deficit in borrower influence. With China’s
        establishment of the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and the One Belt, One Road initiative (Jakupec and Kelly 2015, Kajimoto
        2017), the Japan-led <abbr>AsDB</abbr> may struggle to maintain its key role in the region.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the IBRD and other RDBs, <a class="item2"></a>daily operations are managed by the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>
        President and six Vice Presidents, overseeing a permanent staff of over 3,000 personnel. There have been ten
        Presidents, all of whom have been Japanese, paralleling US control over the World Bank. <a class="item2">Table
        6.5</a> highlights their tenures, priorities, and challenges. Prior to the appointment of Masatsugu Asakawa in
        January 2020, President Takehiko Nakao led the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> from 2013 to 2020 and emphasised the
        importance of climate change, infrastructural growth, and private investment to the future of the Asian RDB
        (Anonymous 2019a).
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 6.5</em> Asian Development Bank Presidents</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">President</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Takeshi Watanabe</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 1966–Nov 1972</td>

            <td class="item12">Watanabe likened the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> to ‘a family doctor’ learning about the health of
            their patients. Regional surveys were conducted to develop a fuller understanding of needs.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Shiro Inoue</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 1972–Nov 1976</td>

            <td class="item12">Annual lending commitments increased from $316 million in 1972 to $776 million in 1976.
            The <abbr>AsDF</abbr> was established in 1974 to finance concessional loans.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Taroichi Yoshida</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 1976–Nov 1981</td>

            <td class="item12">Introduced multi-project loans and restructured operations to be country focused. Sector
            lending was introduced in 1980.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Masao Fujioka</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 1981–Nov 1989</td>

            <td class="item12">Promoted greater coordination of operations and increased co-financing and equity
            investments to the private sector.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Kimimasa Tarumizu</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 1989–Nov 1993</td>

            <td class="item12">Annual lending commitments increased to $5 billion. By 1991, cumulative lending reached
            $37.6 billion for 1,039 projects since 1966.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Mitsuo Sato</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 1993–Jan 1999</td>

            <td class="item12">Began an organisational restructuring to shift to a more country-focused approach and
            was active in responding to the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Tadao Chino</td>

            <td class="item12">Jan 1999–Jan 2005</td>

            <td class="item12">Introduced several new initiatives, including the Poverty Reduction and Private Sector
            Development Strategies, and took a lead role in post-conflict reconstruction.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Haruhiko Kuroda</td>

            <td class="item12">Feb 2005–Mar 2013</td>

            <td class="item12">Set out Strategy 2020 and carried out several internal reforms. He also led the first
            general capital increase in 14 years, tripling <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s capital base to $165 billion.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Takehiko Nakao</td>

            <td class="item12">Apr 2013–Jan 2020</td>

            <td class="item12">Announced plans in May 2014 to combine OCR lending with <abbr>AsDF</abbr>’s resources, a
            reform designed to increase annual lending and grant approvals by 50%.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Masatsugu Asakawa</td>

            <td class="item12">Jan 2020–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Began term emphasising the future role of the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> as the ‘partner of
            choice’ in the Asia-Pacific (a response to the creation of the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>), but COVID-19 has since
            reframed immediate priorities.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> is supported by the <abbr>AsDF</abbr>. It was founded in 1974 and is <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s
        concessional lending arm and the largest of the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s Special Funds. During the
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s first decade, numerous Special Funds delivered concessional funding; President Watanabe
        described their multitude as a ‘nightmare,’ creating unnecessary overlap and confusion (McCawley 2012, 10). The
        <abbr>AsDF</abbr> reduced the overlap, becoming the focal delivery point for concessional lending. During the
        upheavals of the 1973 and 1979 oil price shocks, many low-income countries accessed <abbr>AsDF</abbr> loans
        instead of <abbr>AsDB</abbr> OCR. <abbr>AsDF</abbr> operations were at first denominated in US dollars but
        after 1982 were linked to Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) to improve currency stability. Between 1973 and 2016,
        the <abbr>AsDF</abbr> was replenished 11 times to a value of $31.7 billion, but, as with the IDA, each
        replenishment led to disputes between leading donors over its activities (Erquiaga 2016, 10).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <a class="item2"></a>Grant lending was introduced in 2005 and the <abbr>AsDF</abbr> became a grant-only
        affiliate in 2017 because, in May 2015, the Governors approved an initiative to combine <abbr>AsDB</abbr> OCR
        with <abbr>AsDF</abbr> concessional resources, merging the balance sheet of both. OCR equity tripled from $18
        billion to $53 billion; the consolidation was proposed to increase annual financing capacity to $20 billion by
        2020 with co-financing meant to double that (O’Keeffe, Pryke, and Wurf 2017). In other words, this was a way
        for the Bank to increase its capital base without having to negotiate the politics of a capital increase with
        key shareholders. It was also likely a response to the establishment of the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and the World
        Bank’s MFD agenda. <abbr>AsDF</abbr>-eligible countries continue to receive concessional assistance, even
        though operations are approved through <abbr>AsDB</abbr> OCR.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> began as a <a class="item2"></a>conservative project lender with a strong focus on
        agriculture and its lending grew quite slowly until the 1990s. It later diversified into infrastructure so much
        that it was sometimes referred to as the ‘Asian Dams and Bridges’ bank. By the late 1970s, it had introduced a
        diverse range of lending products including policy-based lending in 1978. The 1979 oil shock expedited these
        changes, as policymakers in developing Asian countries became intensely concerned about food and energy
        security, and <abbr>AsDF</abbr> concessional approvals grew. Besides project loans, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> began
        to prove programme loans (quick-disbursing loans designed to increase productive capacity in high-priority
        areas), multi-project loans (financial products that draw together projects considered too small for normal
        operations), and sector loans (projects financing capital requirements in specific sectors) (McCawley 2012,
        126). It started lending to the private sector in 1983 but this lending remained small for decades (Ben-Artzi
        2016). The IBRD, IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> followed a similar path in introducing lending
        instruments, demonstrating isomorphic alignment.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        During its early years, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>comparative advantages over the larger
        World Bank were its strong networks in the region, greater flexibility, and a less bureaucratic approach to
        lending but, as Bank staff acknowledged in interviews, this has reduced over time. These networks meant they
        had a focus on sub-regional integration initiatives like the Greater Mekong Subregion, which are part of its
        strategy to 2030. The <abbr>AsDB</abbr> was a little less hostile to the state than the World Bank (see
        <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a>), though some analysts have questioned whether they in fact offered a unique
        model (Komori 2016).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In the early 1990s, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> undertook an internal review like the World Bank’s Wapenhans review,
        prompted by concerns over project quality. As with the World Bank, the review found that there was an ‘approval
        culture’ (cited in Komori 2016, 30). The report and pressure from the US led to it become a broader MDB,
        funding social sector projects. The 1997 <a class="item2"></a>Asian Financial Crisis also impacted the
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> greatly, with much of the optimism surrounding the ‘East Asian Miracle’ evaporating (Bello
        1999). Significantly, the Crisis saw the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> move beyond project and programme lending to reflect
        more an IMF-style role as an emergency liquidity provider, although the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> addressed more social
        sector support while the IMF’s principal focus was balance-of-payments stability (McCawley 2012, 219).
        Following the Asian Crisis, and in part because of critiques of its approach to the crisis, the
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> became the first RDB to have a Board-approved governance policy ensuring its portfolio
        benefits the poor. In November 1999, it adopted poverty alleviation as its main mission, reassessing Asia’s
        development path following exposed vulnerability. Notably, this change preceded the World Bank, which
        introduced its policy on 31 December 1999. Still, as Sims (2015) argues, its poverty alleviation objectives
        tend to be constrained by its neoliberal agenda.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>poverty-alleviation mission saw it support the Millennium Development
        Goals (MDGs) unveiled in 2000, alongside the IADB and <abbr>AfDB</abbr>. In 2001, its lending dramatically
        increased and continued to increase across the rest of the decade (Ben-Artzi 2016). The poverty focus shaped
        its response to the 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome when it focussed on developing health
        systems and to increased natural disasters in the region such as the December 2004 Asian tsunami. The Bank also
        dramatically increased its lending to the private sector, going from 1% of lending in 2001 to 16% in 2015
        (O’Keeffe, Pryke, and Wurf 2017, 63), with plans to get to one third of lending by 2024 with $2.50 in
        co-financing for every dollar invested (<abbr>AsDB</abbr> 2018). With the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> supporting the
        innovative financing agenda, following the trend of the World Bank’s MFD, relations with the US have improved
        (O’Keeffe, Pryke, and Wurf 2017).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Historically, most of the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> Group’s lending came from its OCR, while <abbr>AsDF</abbr> projects
        made up a third a total lending. Between 2008 and 2017, OCR annual approvals averaged $11.35 billion, while
        <abbr>AsDF</abbr> approvals averaged $2.93 billion. Illustrating its growth trajectory, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>
        approved $3.4 billion between 1967 and 1976 and $140.3 billion between 2007 and 2016. Of $17.46 billion total
        approvals in 2016, the sectoral division of activities was energy (26%), transport (22%), public sector
        management (13%), finance (11%), urban infrastructure and services (9%), industry and trade (6%), agriculture,
        natural resources, and rural development (6%), education (5%), health (1%), and communications (0.3%)
        (<abbr>AsDB</abbr> 2016). It no longer lends much for agriculture but a lot for energy and transport and a
        significant amount of <a class="item2"></a>policy-based lending for public sector reform. The largest
        recipients of <abbr>AsDB</abbr> Group finance in 2016 were India (17%), China (12%), and Azerbaijan and
        Indonesia (10%). India and China have also been large borrowers in the World Bank, which is not surprising
        since their development challenges and number of people living in poverty are still large. Despite that, the US
        has been pushing for China to graduate to developed country status (and thus stop borrowing) from the
        <abbr>AsDB</abbr> and World Bank.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the World Bank and most RDBs, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> maintains a <a class="item2"></a>technical assistance
        portfolio, although relative funding declined significantly for it in the mid-1990s (O’Keeffe, Pryke, and Wurf
        2017). As with the IADB and <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, advisory services are mandated in its Charter. Its technical
        assistance has been consolidated into ‘transaction technical assistance’ and ‘knowledge and support technical
        assistance.’ The former covers services directly benefitting projects financed by the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, while
        the latter includes other advisory services, such as general institutional capacity building and policy advice.
        It also coordinates several technical assistance grants and funds. Finally, like the IBRD and
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, it manages a training institute: the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> Institute (<abbr>AsDBI</abbr>).
        Established in 1996, it conducts research and delivers face-to-face and online training to mid- and
        senior-level country officials. Its work in the knowledge terrain is not regarded internally or externally as
        being of the quality found at the World Bank (O’Keeffe, Pryke, and Wurf 2017). But, still, it has a fairly
        strong commitment to the production of developmental ‘common sense’ and in 2018 it produced 7,102 knowledge
        outputs (Sims 2020).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> has similar <a class="item2"></a>organisational structures and operational
        mandates to the IBRD, IADB, and <abbr>AfDB</abbr>. It has always been led by a Japanese President, just as
        IBRD’s President has always been an American. Shareholder power in the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> is divided between
        Japan as the leading regional member and the US as the leading non-regional member, like Nigeria and the US in
        the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, but Chinese influence has grown. Its region has gone from one of the poorest in the
        world when the MDB was formed to one of the fastest growing; inequality and pockets of persistent poverty
        remain key challenges. One question is whether it has kept up with the times – up to the 1990s, it was regarded
        as close to its members, very flexible, and the most state-friendly MDB, but this reputation waned after the
        1997 Asian Financial Crisis. It now faces competition from the China-led <abbr>AIIB</abbr> (see <a class="item2">Chapter 8</a>), which challenges its regional construction of ‘Asia’ and its development of more
        complex loan procedures reflecting institutional isomorphism. Still the symbiosis between MDBs reduces
        competition, with the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> having signed memoranda of understanding with both the
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and NDB and already co-financing projects with the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">6.7 <a class="item6"></a>European Bank for Reconstruction and Development</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The EBRD was proposed to facilitate the post-Soviet transition of Central and Eastern Europe following the end
        of the <a class="item2"></a>Cold War. As per the Agreement Establishing the EBRD, signed in Paris, France, on
        29 May 1990, its mandate is to ‘foster the transition towards open market-oriented economies and to promote
        private and entrepreneurial initiative in the Central and Eastern European countries committed to and applying
        the principles of multiparty democracy, pluralism and market economics’ (EBRD 2013). The EBRD is unique among
        the RDBs in that, first, it was created decades after the other regional banks and, second, its mandate
        focusses explicitly on private sector development and democratic reform, while most other MDBs specifically
        exclude any interference in the political affairs of member countries (Korfker 2013, 86). Indeed, its purposes
        and functions have nothing of the Keynesian tone of the IBRD and other RDBs. Rather, the language around
        ‘structural and sectoral economic reforms, including demonopolisation, decentralisation, and privatisation’
        (EBRD 2013) speaks to the Washington Consensus agenda. Nevertheless, its establishment at the height of this
        era signifies that the ‘public sector still had an investment role in transitional economies’ (Phillips 2009,
        9).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Unlike most other RDBs, it does not have a concessional lending arm and its Articles limit the amount it can
        lend to states (Ben-Artzi 2016). As Babb (2009, 31) said, ‘because it lends heavily to private investors, in
        many respects it looks more like the World Bank’s IFC, or even a private bank, than it does a development
        bank.’ But many SRDBs, especially the trade and development banks, look similar and the larger MDBs have been
        expanding their non-sovereign operations. The EBRD’s Establishing Agreement entered into force on 28 March 1991
        and it began operations on 15 April. Between 1991 and 2017, it approved over 5,300 projects totalling €290
        billion.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        French President François Mitterrand proposed the establishment of a <a class="item2"></a>post-Soviet
        transition bank in 1989, which was endorsed by the European Council in December 1989 as it was clear that the
        Soviet bloc was in the throes of collapse. After a meeting between OECD member countries and representatives
        from Malta, Cyprus, Central and Eastern European countries, the EEC, and EIB in January 1990, negotiations for
        the EBRD concluded in May 1990, ‘barely four months after the initial meeting – perhaps the speediest creation
        of a new multilateral institution in history’ (Culpeper 1997, 29). The rapid turnaround from proposal to
        establishment is explained by the speed of the Soviet bloc’s collapse and the capacity of the states backing
        the proposal.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There were initial disputes over whether a new European RDB was necessary, with the US claiming that the World
        Bank and IFC already encompassed the EBRD’s mandate. Further, some Western European states claimed that the EIB
        could be expanded to focus on post-Soviet transition, rather than establish an entirely new MDB (Gutner 2002,
        59–60). Calls to expand the EIB were immediately shut down by the EIB itself, which ‘was distinctly
        uninterested in accepting responsibility to lead a Western aid initiative’ in Central and Eastern Europe
        (Gutner 2002, 60). In the end, it was the uniqueness of the EBRD’s mandate – the interplay between economic
        liberalisation and the promotion of democratic polities – that facilitated the creation of the new RDB.
        However, its operational overlap with commercial banks has led to a new set of critics who continue to question
        its need for existence. Further, the EBRD promoted <a class="item2"></a>‘big bang’ privatisation and
        liberalisation in Central and Eastern Europe, which was largely a failure. Output declined rapidly while the
        number of people living in poverty increased. Privatisation often resulted in the enrichment of a new
        authoritarian oligarchy. Thus, it is not surprising that the EBRD was often mired in scandal (see <a class="item2">Table 6.6</a>) and came under critical scrutiny (Ben-Artzi 2016).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EBRD has 66 <a class="item2"></a>shareholder countries from five continents plus the EU and EIB. The US
        joined and took the largest capital subscription of 10% while France, Germany, Italy, the UK, and Japan each
        have 8.52%, totalling close to 53% of votes. The EIB and EU own 3% each. No other RDB has a regional
        organisation or RDB as a shareholder, however many of the SRDBs do, which often serve as important sources of
        capital and security.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In the EBRD’s case, the EU and EIB are important <a class="item2"></a>capital sources; the EU has contributed
        36% of all grant financing since the EBRD’s establishment and it aims to align the EBRD’s operational
        priorities with EU policy – a distinctive disciplinary approach to development. The EBRD’s Board is very large,
        which Strand (2003) attributes to its political mandate resulting in many state’s wanting their voices heard.
        It has more donors than borrowers on its Board; borrowers have almost no influence and the major shareholders
        have even more power than their shareholdings suggest (Strand 2003). The 2019 Wise Persons Report concluded
        that the EBRD is ‘generally responsive to EU policies,’ though member states do not always coordinate because
        of their different interests and this could increase after Brexit (Wieser 2019, 22).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EBRD President serves as chief of staff and legal representative, just like the other RDBs. Six Presidents
        have led it, all European nationals. <a class="item2">Table 6.6</a> provides highlights of each presidency and
        demonstrates that the EBRD has had ongoing challenges with scandals, poor lending practices, and profligacy.
        While other RDBs have had frequent challenges with project quality, the number of scandals and level of
        profligacy seems more in keeping with poorly run state banks in some developing countries or a few of the SRDBs
        than it does an RDB. The most recent President was Sir Suma Chakrabarti, who was born in India but is a British
        national; he stepped down in July 2020 and, due to COVID-19, there has been a delay in appointing his
        successor. Upon joining the EBRD, <a class="item2"></a>President Chakrabarti emphasised two priorities: first,
        the economic situation in Eastern Europe and, second, supporting the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean after
        the <a class="item2"></a>Arab Spring (EBRD 2012). EBRD staffing is more dominated by bankers than the other
        RDBs, with few development experts, and thus ‘bankers and bureaucrats carry out the EBRD’s political goals’
        (Ben-Artzi 2016, 93).
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 6.6</em> European Bank for Reconstruction and Development Presidents</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">President</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Jacques Attali</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">Apr 1991–Jun 1993</td>

            <td class="item12">Proposed the idea of the EBRD in June 1989 and chaired the Paris Conference that led to
            its creation. His tenure was mired by scandal, including uncontested and shocking mismanagement and
            profligacy.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Jacques de Larosière</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">Sep 1993–Jan 1998</td>

            <td class="item12">Restored EBRD’s reputation and credibility following predecessor’s controversies and
            scandals.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Horst Köhler</td>

            <td class="item12">German</td>

            <td class="item12">Sep 1998–Apr 2000</td>

            <td class="item12">Addressed EBRD’s annual $305 million loses by reforming its notoriously lax investment
            policies and opulent trimmings.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Jean Lemierre</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">Jul 2000–Jul 2008</td>

            <td class="item12">Before joining EBRD, Lemierre was head of France’s Treasury. He later served as a key
            negotiator in the Greek debt restructuring.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Thomas Mirow</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">Jul 2008–Jul 2012</td>

            <td class="item12">Previously served as Chairperson of Germany’s Social Democrat Party and Alternate
            Governor at the World Bank. Advocated a strong neoliberal response to the 2008 GFC, though adjustment and
            restructuring.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Sir Suma Chakrabarti</td>

            <td class="item12">Indian / British</td>

            <td class="item12">Jul 2012– Jul 2020</td>

            <td class="item12">Came from extensive experience in international development economics and policymaking.
            Responsible for the Green Economy Transition (GET), engagement with the Sustainable Development Goals
            (SDGs) and 2015 Paris Agreement, and emphasised private sector and market growth. Due to COVID-19, the
            election of his successor was postponed until October 2020.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and EBRD Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        EBRD finance is divided into three categories: loans, equity investments, and guarantees to promote trade. Its
        loans have a maturity period of one to 15 years, no grace period, although project-specific grace periods may
        be incorporated, and are offered at either fixed or floated interest rates (Faure, Prizzon, and Rogerson 2015).
        Thus, its standard terms are much harder than the other RDBs, especially given the absence of a concessional
        lending arm. Loan repayments are normally in equal, semi-annual instalments. Annual investments averaged $9.1
        billion between 2010 and 2017. Loan disbursements steadily grew since its establishment, with a jump in loans
        from around 2006; Russia has been its major borrower (Ben-Artzi 2016). Since commencing lending operations, its
        main sectoral focusses have been financial institutions (€44 billion cumulative 1991 to 2007), industry,
        commerce, and agribusiness (€33.5 billion), infrastructure (€22.3 billion), and energy (€19.6 billion). Its
        interest rates are similar or only slightly lower than commercial banks, though maturities are generally longer
        (Ben-Artzi 2016). These foci are reflective of its commercial bank persona and are similar to the IFC, with the
        2019 Wise Persons Report stating that the EBRD’s ‘expertise is strong in relation to the development of the
        private sector, even if it does not have comprehensive sector coverage and is weak in, especially, social
        sectors such as health care and education’ (Wieser 2019, 22). Lending to financial intermediaries has been
        coming under increasing scrutiny in recent years due to a lack of transparency and environmental impact. Its
        private sector projects generally range from €4 million to €218 million, but average investments are a
        relatively small at €22 million. In contrast to the IADB, <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, and <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, the EBRD is
        far more aligned to project-based lending and equity investments, revealing again it is more like a commercial
        bank than a traditional RDB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        EBRD lending is supported by technical assistance, divided into policy reform dialogue services and advisory
        services. Policy reform dialogue services focus on coordinating the strategies, policies, and related
        initiatives that support the EBRD’s transition mandate and advisory services help SMEs access business advice
        just like the technical assistance portfolio of the IFC. The EBRD also sponsors the Central European Initiative
        (<abbr>CEI</abbr>), a regional forum founded in 1989 comprised of 18 member countries mainly from Central and
        Eastern Europe that promotes collaboration and consultation.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, reflecting its persona as a commercial bank with a development agenda, the EBRD is less transparent
        than the other RDBs. It also has several unique features vis-à-vis other MDBs. First, it does not provide
        concessional finance and focusses on private investment and, second, it promotes a political agenda by
        encouraging democratic reform. Despite being established much later than the other RDBs, its founding is
        reminiscent of the other regional banks, in the sense that the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> responded to the integration
        and development of post-colonial Africa. The major difference is that the EBRD emerged at the height of the
        Washington Consensus, which it presents as ‘common sense,’ in contrast to the Keynesian/New Deal tone of the
        earlier RDBs. Thus, the EBRD aims ‘to offer structural coherence in post-communist transition’ (Shields 2015,
        180).
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr>. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Agreement Establishing the African Development Bank</em>. Abidjan, Côte
            d’Ivoire: African Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AfDB</abbr>. 2018. “The High 5s for Transforming Africa.” <a href="https://www.afdb.org" class="item2">https://www.afdb.org/en/the-high-5/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ajomo, M.A. 1976. “Regional Economic Organisations: The African Experience.” <em class="calibre4">The International and
            Comparative Law Quarterly</em> 25 (1):58–101.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Akin-Olugbade, Adesegun A. 2003. “Managing Development in a Time of Crisis: The Legal Framework for the
            Temporary Relocation of the African Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">The International Lawyer</em> 38 (3):725–39.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Anonymous. 2019a. Asian Development Bank Interview #1. edited by Adrian Robert Bazbauers: UNSW Canberra.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Anonymous. 2019b. European Investment Bank Interview #1. edited by Adrian Robert Bazbauers: UNSW Canberra.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 1967. Agreement Establishing the Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 2016. Annual Report 2016. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable
            Asia and the Pacific</em>. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Babb, Sarah. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Behind the Development Banks: Washington Politics, World Poverty, and the Wealth of
            Nations</em>. Chicago, IL and London: The University of Chicago Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Barria, Lilian A., and Steven D. Roper. 2004. “Economic Transition in Latin American and Post-Communist
            Countries: A Comparison of Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">International Journal of Politics, Culture,
            and Society</em> 17 (4):619–38. doi: 10.1023/ B:IJPS.0000031235.74193.a4.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. 2018. The World Bank and Transferring Development: Policy Movement through
            Technical Assistance, International Political Economy Series. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bello, Walden. 1999. “The Asian Financial Crisis: Causes, Dynamics, Prospects.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of the Asia
            Pacific Economy</em> 4 (1):33–55. doi: 10.1080/13547869908724669.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ben-Artzi, Ruth. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Regional Development Banks in Comparison: Banking Strategies versus Development
            Goals</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Biney, Ama. 2019. “Pan-Africanism: A History.” In <em class="calibre4">Routledge Handbook of South-South Relations</em>,
            edited by Elena Fiddian-Qasmiyeh and Patricia Daley, 177–87. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Broad, Robin, and John Cavanagh. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Development Redefined: How the Market Met Its Match</em>.
            Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bull, Benedicte, and Morten Bøås. 2003. “Multilateral Development Banks as Regionalising Actors: The Asian
            Development Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">New Political Economy</em> 8 (2):245–61.
            doi: 10.1080/13563460307176.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2005. “Grants versus Loans for Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">American Economic
            Review</em> 95 (2):393–7.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Coburn, Carolyn, Michael Restivo, and John M. Shandra. 2015. “The African Development Bank and Infant
            Mortality: A Cross-national Analysis of Structural Adjustment and Investment Lending from 1990 to 2006.”
            <em class="calibre4">International Journal of Comparative Sociology</em> 56 (3–4):275–96. doi: 10.1177/0020715215610799.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cook, Malcolm. 2015. “Two Asias: <abbr>AIIB</abbr> v ADB.” <em class="calibre4">The Straits Times</em>, 5 June. Accessed 20
            June 2016. <a href="http://www.straitstimes.com" class="item2">http://www.straitstimes.com/opinion/two-asias-aiib-v-adb</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Culpeper, Roy. 1997. <em class="calibre4">Titans or Behemoths?</em> London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            EBRD. 2012. “Speech Transcript: Suma Chakrabarti at a Press Conference on 1 October 2012 in London.”
            European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. <a href="https://www.ebrd.com" class="item2">https://www.ebrd.com/cs/Satellite?c=Content&amp;cid=1395238673972&amp;d=Mobile&amp;pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FContentLayout</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            EBRD. 2013. Agreement Establishing the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. London: European
            Bank for Reconstruction and Development
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            English, E. Phillip, and Harris M. Mule. 1996. <em class="calibre4">The African Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne
            Rienner.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Erquiaga, Philip. 2016. <em class="calibre4">A History of Financial Management at the Asian Development Bank: Engineering
            Financial Innovation and Impact on an Emerging Asia</em>. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Faure, Raphaëlle, Annalisa Prizzon, and Andrew Rogerson. 2015. <em class="calibre4">Multilateral Development Banks: A Short
            Guide</em>. London: Overseas Development Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Fordwor, Kwame Donkoh. 1981. <em class="calibre4">The African Development Bank: Problems of International Cooperation</em>.
            New York: Pergamon Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gavas, Mikaela. 2019. The Wise Persons Group Report on Europe’s Development Finance Architecture: Merger,
            Acquisition, or Reinvention?: Centre for Global Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Giles, Chris, and Jim Pickard. 2018. “European Investment Bank wants UK to Remain a Member.” <em class="calibre4">Financial
            Times</em>. <a href="https://www.ft.com" class="item2">https://www.ft.com/content/24a5c5c0-8441-11e8-96dd-fa565ec55929</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Griffith-Jones, Stephany, and Judith Tyson. 2013. The European Investment Bank: Lessons for Developing
            Countries. In <em class="calibre4">WIDER Working Paper</em>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gutner, Tamar L. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Banking on the Environment: Multilateral Development Banks and Their
            Environmental Performance in Central and Eastern Europe</em>. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2014. “The Politics of Loan Pricing in Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">Review of
            International Political Economy</em> 21 (3):611–39. doi: 10.1080/ 09692290.2013.858365.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2016. “The Invisible Hand: Financial Pressures and Organisational Convergence in
            Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Journal of Development Studies</em> 52 (1):92–112. doi:
            10.1080/00220388.2015.1075978.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IADB. 1996. Agreement Establishing the Inter-American Development Bank. Washington, DC: Inter-American
            Development Bank
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IADB. 2010. Annual Report 2010. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IADB. 2017. Annual Report 2017. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Jakupec, Victor, and Max Kelly. 2015. “The Relevance of Asian Development Bank: Existing in the Shadow of
            the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Regional Socio-Economic Issues</em> 5 (3):31–46.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kajimoto, Tetsushi. 2017. “As Japan Adapts to China’s Rise, <abbr>AsDB</abbr> Wrestles with Relevance.”
            <a href="https://www.reuters.com" class="item2">https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-adb-asia/as-japan-adapts-to-chinas-rise-adb-wrestles-with-relevance-idUKKBN17Z18V</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kappagoda, Nihal. 1995. <em class="calibre4">The Asian Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kellerman, Miles. 2019. “The Proliferation of Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Review of
            International Organizations</em> 14 (1):107–45. doi: 10.1007/s11558-018-9302-y.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Komori, Yasumasa. 2016. “The Asian Development Bank: Joining the Fight against Corruption?” In <em class="calibre4">Global
            Economic Governance and the Practices of the Multilateral Development Banks</em>, edited by Susan Park and
            Jonathan R. Strand, 21–38. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Korfker, Fredrik. 2013. “Reflections on Private-sector Evaluation in the European Bank for Reconstruction
            and Development: 1991–2010.” <em class="calibre4">Evaluation</em> 19 (1):85–96. doi: 10.1177/1356389012472267.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Krasner, Stephen D. 1981. “Power Structures and Regional Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">International
            Organization</em> 35 (2):303–28.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lim, Daniel Yew Mao, and James Raymond Vreeland. 2013. “Regional Organizations and International Politics:
            Japanese Influence over the Asian Development Bank and the UN Security Council.” <em class="calibre4">World Politics</em> 65
            (1):34–72. doi: 10.1017/S004388711200024X.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lopes, Mark. 2019. “Latin America’s Other Election: The Next IDB President.” Accessed 2 July. <a href="https://www.americasquarterly.org" class="item2">https://www.americasquarterly.org/article/latin-americas-other-election-the-next-idb-president/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            McCawley, Peter. 2012. <em class="calibre4">Banking on the Future of Asia and the Pacific: 50 Years of the Asian Development
            Bank</em>. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mingst, Karen. 1990. <em class="calibre4">Politics &amp; the African Development Bank</em>. Lexington: The University of
            Kentucky Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Nakao, Takehiko. 2017. “Economic Outlook for Asia and the Role of the Asian Development Bank.”
            <em class="calibre4">Asia-Pacific Review</em> 24 (1):37–57. doi: 10.1080/13439006.2017.1321295.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Nelson, Paul. 2000. “Whose Civil Society? Whose Governance? Decision Making and Practice in the New Agenda
            at the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank.” 6 (4):405. doi: 10.1163/19426720-00604003.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            O’Keeffe, Annmaree, Jonathan Pryke, and Hannah Wurf. 2017. <em class="calibre4">Strengthening the Asian Development Bank in
            21st Century Asia</em>. Sydney: Lowy Institute for International Policy.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Pandolfelli, Lauren E., and John M. Shandra. 2013. “The African Development Bank, Structural Adjustment,
            and Child Mortality: A Cross-National Analysis of Sub-Saharan Africa.” <em class="calibre4">International Journal of Health
            Services</em> 43 (2):337–61. doi: 10.2190/HS.43.2.i.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Phillips, David A. 2009. <em class="calibre4">Reforming the World Bank: Twenty Years of Trial – and Error</em>. Cambridge:
            Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ranis, Gustav. 1997. “The World Bank Near the Turn of the Century.” In <em class="calibre4">Global Development Fifty Years
            After Bretton Woods: Essays in Honour of Gerald K. Helleiner</em>, edited by Roy Culpeper, Albert Berry and
            Frances Stewart, 72–89. London: North South Institute / Macmillan Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rapley, John. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Understanding Development: Theory and Practice in the Third World</em>. Boulder,
            CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers Inc.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rathus, Joel. 2008. “China, Japan and Regional Organisations: The Case of the Asian Development Bank.”
            <em class="calibre4">Japanese Studies</em> 28 (1):87–99. doi: 10.1080/10371390801939112.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Robinson, Nick. 2009. “The European Investment Bank: The EU’s Neglected Institution*.” <em class="calibre4">JCMS: Journal of
            Common Market Studies</em> 47 (3):651–73. doi: 10.1111/j.1468– 5965.2009.01818.x.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Salinger, Adva. 2018. “Q&amp;A: EIB President Werner Hoyer on European Aid Turf War, Iran, and More.”
            Devex. <a href="https://www.devex.com" class="item2">https://www.devex.com/news/q-a-eib-president-werner-hoyer-on-european-aid-turf-war-iran-and-more-93566</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Scheman, L. Ronald. 1997. “Banking on Growth: The Role of the Inter-American Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Journal
            of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs</em> 39 (1):85–100. doi: 10.2307/166498.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shaw, Christopher L. 1991. “Par Inter Paribus: The Nature of Power in Cooperation: Lessons (For the United
            States) From the African Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">African Affairs</em> 90 (361):537–58. doi:
            10.1093/oxfordjournals.afraf.a098468.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shields, Stuart. 2015. “The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development as Organic Intellectual of
            Neoliberal Common Sense in Post-Communist Transition.” In <em class="calibre4">Global Economic Governance and the
            Development Practices of the Multilateral Development Banks</em>, edited by Susan Park and Jonathan R.
            Strand, 167–86. Abingdon: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sims, Kearrin. 2015. “The Asian Development Bank and the Production of Poverty: Neoliberalism, Technocratic
            Modernization and Land Dispossession in the Greater Mekong Subregion.” <em class="calibre4">Singapore Journal of Tropical
            Geography</em> 36 (1):112–26. doi: 10.1111/sjtg.12093.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sims, Kearrin. 2020. “The ADB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>: Cooperation, Competition, and Contestation.” In
            <em class="calibre4">Rethinking Multilateralism in Foreign Aid: Beyond the Neoliberal Hegemony</em>, edited by Viktor
            Jakupec, Max Kelly and Jonathan Makuwira, 145–159. London: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Strand, Jonathan R. 2003. “Power Relations in an Embedded Institution: The European Bank for Reconstruction
            and Development.” <em class="calibre4">European Integration</em> 25 (2):115–29.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tussie, Dianne. 1995. <em class="calibre4">The Inter-American Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Vigdor, Neil. 2020. “Trump Administration’s Nominee for Development Bank Chief Breaks with Protocol.”
            <em class="calibre4">New York Times</em>, June 17. <a href="https://www.nytimes.com" class="item2">https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/17/business/Mauricio-claver-Carone-inter-american-bank.html</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Waldron, Travis. 2020. “The Man (And The Mission) Behind Trump’s Clash with Venezuela.” HuffPost, accessed
            2 July.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wieser, Thomas. 2019. Europe in the World: The Future of the European Financial Architecture for
            Development: An Independent Report by the High-Level Group of Wise Persons on the European Financial
            Architecture for Development Council of the European Union (General Secretariat). In <em class="calibre4">Secretariat of the
            Wise Persons Group</em>: General Secretariat of the Council of the EU: Economic and Financial Affairs.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    </div>
</body>
</html>
