<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Global Architecture of Multilateral Development Banks</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<div class="calibre1">
<div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Africa Fintech Summit. 2019. “5 Questions with Admassu Tadesse, President &amp; Chief Executive of Trade
            and Development Bank (TDB).” <a href="https://africafintechsummit.com" class="item2">https://africafintechsummit.com/2019/11/19/5-questions-with-admassu-tadesse-president-chief-executive-of-trade-and-development-bank-tdb/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Aglina, Moses Kwame, Adebayo Agbejule, and Godwin Yao Nyamuame. 2016. “Policy Framework on Energy Access
            and Key Development Indicators: ECOWAS Interventions and the Case of Ghana.” <em class="calibre4">Energy Policy</em>
            97:332–42. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2016.07.012.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ali, Muhammad, and Nooreen Khalid. 2015. An Analytical Study of Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO):
            Challenges and Perspectives. <em class="calibre4">European Academic Research</em> 2 (11): 14031–14045.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Banda, Lufeyo. 2015. Report on the Assessment of African Sub-Regional Development Banks’ Contribution to
            Infrastructure Development. The Infrastructure Consortium for Africa.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Baran, Alois. 1979/1980. “Origin and Development of the International Investment Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Soviet and
            Eastern European Foreign Trade</em> 15 (4):79–104.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>. 2018. Annual Report 2017. Brazzaville, Republic of Congo: Development Bank of Central
            African States.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ben-Artzi, Ruth. 2016. <em class="calibre4">Regional Development Banks in Comparison: Banking Strategies versus Development
            Goals</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bhatia, Rattan. 1985. The West African Monetary Union: An Analytical Review. In <em class="calibre4">Occassional
            Papers</em>: International Monetary Fund.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BOAD</abbr>. 2016. Annual Report 2016. Lomé, Togo: West African Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bourne, C. March 22, 2010. The Global Economic Crisis: Developing Economies and the Role of Multilateral
            Development Banks. Address by Professor Compton Bourne to the International Labour Office. Caribbean
            Development Bank. <a href="https://www.caribank.org" class="item2">https://www.caribank.org/sites/default/files/publication-resources/THE%20GLOBAL%20ECONOMIC%20CRISIS_%20Geneva_March22.pdf</a>
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>. 2011. Agreement Establishing the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank. Black Sea Trade
            and Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CABEI</abbr>. 2015. 2015–2019 Institutional Strategy: Integrating Sustainable Development and
            Competitiveness. Tegucigalpa, Honduras: Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CABEI</abbr>. 2016. Annual Report 2016. Tegucigalpa, Honduras: Central American Bank for Economic
            Integration.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CABEI</abbr>. 2020. 2020–2024 Strategic Framework: The Region’s Sustainable Development Pillar.
            Tegucigalpa, Honduras: Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cáceres, Luis René. 1985. “Domestic Savings and Investment in Central American and the Role of the Central
            American Bank for Economic Integration.” <em class="calibre4">Savings and Development</em> 9 (3):265–96.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cevallos, Ricardo. 1996. “The Central American Bank for Economic Integration.” <em class="calibre4">Tulane Journal of
            International and Comparative Law</em> 4 (2):245–74.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cochrane, James D. 1965. “The Central American Bank for Economic Integration: A Descriptive Note.”
            <em class="calibre4">Caribbean Studies</em> 5 (2):64–73.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Culpeper, Roy. 1997. <em class="calibre4">Titans or Behemoths?</em> London: Lynne Rienner.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Duvall, Donald K. 1964. “Latin American Economic Integration Developments.” <em class="calibre4">International and
            Comparative Law Bulletin</em> 9 (1):34–42.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>EADB</abbr>. 2012. The East African Development Bank 1967–2012: 45 Years Strong, Your Partner in
            Development. Kampala, Uganda: East African Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>EADB</abbr>. 2017. Annual Report 2017. Kampala, Uganda: East African Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            EBID. 2008. ECOWAS Zone Guide for Investors. Lomé, Togo: ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            EBID. 2020. Annual Report 2019. Lomé, Togo: ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            EDB. 2006. Articles of Agreement. Almaty: Eurasian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            EDB. 2018. Annual Report 2017. Eurasian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engen, Lars, and Annalisa Prizzon. 2018. A Guide to the Multilateral Development Banks. London: Overseas
            Development Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            ETDB. 2005. Articles of Agreement. Şişli: ECO Trade and Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            ETDB. 2018. Annual Report 2017. ECO Trade and Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            FONPLATA. 2018a. Annual Report 2018. Santa Cruz, Bolivia: FONPLATA Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            FONPLATA. 2018b. Financial Fund for the Development of the River Plate Basin Articles of Agreement.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            FONPLATA. 2019. Annual Report 2019. Santa Cruz, Bolivia: FONPLATA Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Francuz, Henryk. 1969. “The International Bank for Economic Cooperation.” <em class="calibre4">Staff Papers (International
            Monetary Fund)</em> 16 (3):489–503.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Fritz, Barbara, and Laurissa Mühlich. 2019. “Regional Financial Arrangements in the Global Financial Safety
            Net: The Arab Monetary Fund and the Eurasian Fund for Stabilization and Development.” <em class="calibre4">Development and
            Change</em> 50 (1):96–121. doi: 10.1111/dech.12466.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            García, Enrique. 2006. “IGO Development Financing in the Andean Region.” <em class="calibre4">The Brown Journal of World
            Affairs</em> 12 (2):177–89.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gupta, Arushi. 2015. Regional Integration in West Africa: The Evolution of ECOWAS. In <em class="calibre4">Occasional
            Papers</em>: Observer Research Foundation.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gutner, Tamar L. 2002. <em class="calibre4">Banking on the Environment: Multilateral Development Banks and Their
            Environmental Performance in Central and Eastern Europe</em>. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hajizada, Mukhtar. 2014. “Patterns of Regional Collaboration and Institutional Cooperation Around the Black
            Sea.” <em class="calibre4">Perceptions</em> XIX (3):101–21.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hardy, Chandra. 1995. <em class="calibre4">The Caribbean Development Bank</em>. London: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2015a. Developmental Revolution or Bretton Woods Revisited? The Prospects of the
            <abbr>BRICS</abbr> New Development Bank and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. London: Overseas
            Development Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2015b. Infrastructure Finance in the Developing World: Challenges and Opportunities for
            Multilateral Development Banks in 21st Century Infrastructure Finance. Seoul: The Global Green Growth
            Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2016. “The Invisible Hand: Financial Pressures and Organisational Convergence in
            Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Journal of Development Studies</em> 52 (1):92–112. doi:
            10.1080/00220388.2015.1075978.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2017. “He Who Pays the Piper Calls the Tune: Credit Rating Agencies and Multilateral
            Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Review of International Organizations</em> 12 (2):281–306. doi:
            10.1007/s11558-017-9271–6.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2019. “‘Minilateral’ Development Banks: What the Rise of Africa’s Trade and Development
            Bank Says about Multilateral Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):164–90. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12467.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IBEC. 2018. The Updated Strategy of the International Bank for Economic Cooperation. Moscow, Russia:
            International Bank for Economic Cooperation.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IBEC. 2019. Annual Report 2018. Moscow, Russia: International Bank for Economic Cooperation.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IBEC. 2020. Financial Statements 2019. Moscow, Russia: International Bank for Economic Cooperation.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IIB. 2017. Development Strategy of the International Investment Bank for 2018–2022: Growing for Greater
            Development Impact. Moscow, Russia: International Investment Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IIB. 2018. Annual Report 2018. Budapest, Hungary: International Investment Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IMF. 2019. Central African Economic and Monetary Community (<abbr>CEMAC</abbr>). In <em class="calibre4">IMF Country
            Reports</em>. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Imre, Ahmet. 2006. “Financial Cooperation within the Black Sea Region: The Experience of the Black Sea
            Trade and Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Southeast European and Black Sea Studies</em> 6 (2):243–55. doi:
            10.1080/14683850600694312.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ingham, Barbara, and Mark Figueroa. 2009. “W. Arthur Lewis and the Legacy of the Caribbean Development
            Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Eastern Caribbean Studies</em> 34 (4):1–20.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Javaid, Umbreen, and Habibollah Javan Siahmardy. 2017. “Globalization, Interdependence and Economic
            Cooperation Organization (ECO).” <em class="calibre4">South Asian Studies</em> 32 (1):27–28.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mak, James, and Seiji Finch Naya. 1994. “Is There a Need for a Pacific Islands Development Bank?”
            <em class="calibre4">Pacific Economic Bulletin</em> 9 (2):35–40.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Manoli, Panagiota. 2013. “Black Sea Cooperation: A Difficult Path to Overcoming Divisions and
            Marginalization.” <em class="calibre4">Plural</em> 1 (1–2):210–16.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Marianna, Biró, and Kovács Zoltán. 2019. “Putin’s Bank Moves to Budapest, Gets All Conceivable Privileges
            and Immunities.” Index. <a href="https://index.hu" class="item2">https://index.hu/english/2019/02/20/international_investment_bank_russia_hungary_putin_orban_immunity/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mbadi, Omer. 2015. “After the Adandé era, How the <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> Can Revive.” Jeune Afrique. <a href="https://www.jeuneafrique.com" class="item2">https://www.jeuneafrique.com/mag/241372/economie/apres-lere-adande-comment-la-bdeac-peut-se-relancer/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Mistry, Percy S., and Lolette Kritzinger-van Niekerk. 1998. Development Finance and the Need for a
            Sub-Regional Development Financing Institution in SADC. Southern African Development Community Finance
            &amp; Investment Sector Coordinating Unit Research Project.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Momodu, Raheemat. 2018. “Nationalism Underpinned by Pan-Regionalism: African Foreign Policies in ECOWAS in
            an Era of Anti-Globalization.” In <em class="calibre4">African Foreign Policies in International Institutions</em>, edited
            by Jason Warner and Timothy M. Shaw, 95–112. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. doi: 10.1057/978-1-137-57574-6
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Moody’s. 2018. “Moody’s Assigns First-time B1 Issuer Rating to EBID; Negative Outlook.” Moody’s Investors
            Service. <a href="https://www.moodys.com" class="item2">https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-assigns-first-time-B1-issuer-rating-to-EBID-negative--PR_381970</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Murinde, Victor, and Joram Kariisa-Kasa. 1997. “The Financial Performance of the East African Development
            Bank: A Retrospective Analysis.” <em class="calibre4">Accounting, Business &amp; Financial History</em> 7 (1):81–104. doi:
            10.1080/095852097330775.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Notaro, Juan E. 2019. “FONPLATA, 45 Years Bringing Development Closer to the People.” FONPLATA <a href="https://www.fonplata.org" class="item2">https://www.fonplata.org/en/news/30-06-2019/fonplata-45-years-bringing-development-closer-people</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ocampo, José Antonio. 2002. “Recasting the International Financial Agenda.” In <em class="calibre4">International Capital
            Markets in Transition</em>, edited by John Eatwell and Lance Taylor, 19–22. New York: Oxford University
            Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ocampo, José Antonio, and Daniel Titelman. 2009. “Subregional Financial Cooperation: The South American
            Experience.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Post Keynesian Economics</em> 32 (2):249–68. doi: 10.2753/PKE0160-3477320208.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ocampo, José Antonio, and Daniel Titelman. 2012. Regional Monetary Cooperation in Latin America. In
            <em class="calibre4">ADBI Working Paper</em>. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ouedraogo, Nosseyamba Benjamin. 2013. “Stock Market Development and Economic Growth in West African
            Economic and Monetary Union.” <em class="calibre4">African Journal of Economic and Sustainable Development</em> 2
            (2):172–88.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Park, Susan. 2014. “Institutional Isomorphism and the Asian Development Bank’s Accountability Mechanism:
            Something Old, Something New, Something Borrowed, Something Blue?” <em class="calibre4">The Pacific Review</em> 27
            (2):217–39.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            PIDB. 2014. Annual Report 2013. Pacific Islands Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            PIDB. 2017. Annual Report 2016. Pacific Islands Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            PIDB. 2019a. Annual Report 2018. Pacific Islands Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            PIDB. 2019b. “Mission &amp; Purpose.” Pacific Islands Development Bank. <a href="https://pacificidb.com" class="item2">https://pacificidb.com/mission-purpose/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Pieck, Sonja K. 2011. “Beyond Postdevelopment: Civic Responses to Regional Integration in the Amazon.”
            <em class="calibre4">Journal of Cultural Geography</em> 28 (1):179–202. doi: 10.1080/08873631.2011.548497.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Prada, Fernando. 2012. World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, and Sub-Regional Development Banks in
            Latin America: Dynamics of a System of Multilateral Development Banks. In <em class="calibre4"><abbr>AsDBI</abbr> Working
            Paper Series No. 380:13</em>. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Quah, Chee-Heong. 2016. “A Diagnostic on the West African Monetary Union.” <em class="calibre4">South African Journal of
            Economics</em> 84 (1):129–48. doi: 10.1111/saje.12089.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ray, Rebecca, and Rohini Kamal. 2019. “Can South–South Cooperation Compete? The Development Bank of Latin
            America and the Islamic Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):191–220. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12468.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Robert, René. 2004. The Social Dimension of Regional Integration in ECOWAS. In <em class="calibre4">Working Paper
            Series</em>: International Labour Organisation.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ryan, Yasmine. 2010. “Gabon ‘Siphoned Funds’ to France.” Al Jazeera. <a href="https://www.aljazeera.com" class="item2">https://www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2010/12/2010122984115531832.html</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            S&amp;P Global Ratings. 2019. Introduction To Supranationals Special Edition 2019.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sagasti, Francisco, and Fernando Prada. 2006. “Regional Development Banks: A Comparative Perspective.” In
            <em class="calibre4">Regional Financial Cooperation</em>, edited by José Antonio Ocampo, 68–106. Maryland: Brookings
            Institution Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shelepov, Andrei, and Inna Andronova. 2018. “Engagement between the New Development Bank and Other
            Development Banks: A Formal Basis for Future Cooperation.” <em class="calibre4">International Organisations Research
            Journal</em> 13 (1):99–113.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Simmonds, K. R. 1967. “The Central American Common Market: An Experiment in Regional Integration.”
            <em class="calibre4">International and Comparative Law Quarterly</em> 16 (4):911–30. doi: 10.1093/iclqaj/16.4.911.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Smith, W. W. May 30, 2018. President’s Remarks: 48th Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors: Opening
            Ceremony. St. George’s, Grenada: Caribbean Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Soudan, François. 2013. “<abbr>BDEAC</abbr>: Between Michaël Adandé and André Nzapayéké, the Tea Towel Is
            Burning.” Jeune Afrique. <a href="https://www.jeuneafrique.com" class="item2">https://www.jeuneafrique.com/136971/politique/bdeac-entre-micha-l-adand-et-andr-nzapay-k-le-torchon-br-le/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Stone, David R. 2008. “<abbr>CMEA</abbr>’s International Investment Bank and the Crisis of Developed
            Socialism.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Cold War Studies</em> 10 (3):48–77. doi: 10.1162/jcws.2008.10.3.48.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            TDB. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 2018</em>. Bujumburu: Trade and Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tisdell, Clem. 2002. “Globalisation, Development and Poverty in the Pacific Islands: The Situation of the
            Least Developed Nations.” <em class="calibre4">International Journal of Social Economics</em> 29 (12):902–22. doi:
            10.1108/03068290210447969.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tsangarides, Charalambos G., and Mahvash Saeed Qureshi. 2008. “Monetary Union Membership in West Africa: A
            Cluster Analysis.” <em class="calibre4">World Development</em> 36 (7):1261–79. doi: <a href="https://doi.org" class="item2">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2007.06.019</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            United Nations. 2005. World Economic and Social Survey 2005: Financing for Development. New York: United
            Nations.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Vinokurov, Evgeny. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Introduction to the Eurasian Economic Union</em>. New York: Palgrave
            Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Vinokurov, Evgeny. 2019. <em class="calibre4">Interaction of Eurasian and International Financial Institutions</em>. Almaty:
            Eurasian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Vinokurov, Evgeny, Alexander Efimov, and Artem Levenkov. 2019. “The Eurasian Fund for Stabilization and
            Development: A Regional Financing Arrangement and Its Place in the Global Financial Safety Net.” Almaty:
            Eurasian Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Vladova, Galya, and Jörg Knieling. 2014. “Potential and Challenges for the Black Sea Regional Cooperation.”
            <em class="calibre4">Eastern Journal of European Studies</em> 5 (1).
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wihtol, Robert. 2014. Whither Multilateral Development Finance? In <em class="calibre4"><abbr>AsDBI</abbr> Working Paper
            Series</em>. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Yabi, Gilles Olakounlé. 2010. The Role of ECOWAS in Managing Political Crisis and Conflict: The Cases of
            Guinea and Guinea-Bissau. Abuja, Nigeria: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Zappile, Tina M. 2016. “Sub-Regional Development Banks: Development as Usual?” In <em class="calibre4">Global Economic
            Governance and the Development Practices of the Multilateral Development Banks</em>, edited by Susan Park
            and Jonathan R. Strand, 187–211. Oxon: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    <h1 class="toc"><a href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter8" class="item2">8 The specialised development banks</a></h1>

    <div class="item">
      The specialised development banks are the fourth and final multilateral development bank (MDB) grouping we
      explore in this book. Compared to the relative typological cohesion of the World Bank Group, regional development
      banks (RDBs), and sub-regional development banks (SRDBs), the specialised development banks are far more
      disparate in mandate and operation; they are specialised as niche development financiers. Adding to the
      typological confusion, a few of the specialised banks could arguably be classified as regional or sub-regional
      actors, with their operations occurring in discrete geographical areas. Still, the mandate of the specialised
      banks sets them apart, often being focussed on narrower objectives compared to the other MDBs. Emerging in
      response to changes in the global political economy, including post-<a class="item2"></a>Second World War
      reconstruction, the 1973 oil price shock, and the 21st-century rise of emerging powers, the specialised banks
      first arrived in 1956 when the Council of Europe Development Bank (<abbr>CEB</abbr>) – the first MDB after the
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) – was founded. They continue to appear through to
      the 2015 launch of the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (<abbr>AIIB</abbr>), though most were
      established in the decade between 1968 and 1977.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      There are nine specialised development banks, as outlined in <a class="item2">Table 8.1</a>. Two, the
      <abbr>CEB</abbr> and International Fund for Agricultural Development (<a class="item2"></a>IFAD), work as
      stand-alone actors, while the remaining seven can be viewed as three strategic blocs: an Arab-led grouping, a
      Nordic one, and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
    </div>

    <table class="item8" width="98%">
      <caption class="item9">
        <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 8.1</em> Specialised development banks overview</a>
      </caption>

      <thead class="item10">
        <tr class="calibre9">
          <th class="item11">Year</th>

          <th class="item11">Specialised development banks</th>

          <th class="item11">Region</th>

          <th class="item11">Membership</th>

          <th class="item11">Subscribed capital</th>

          <th class="item11">Annual approvals (2018)</th>

          <th class="item11">Credit rating</th>

          <th class="item11">Headquarters</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody class="calibre10">
        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1956</td>

          <td class="item12">Council of Europe Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Europe</td>

          <td class="item12">42</td>

          <td class="item12">$6.22 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$4.4 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Paris, France</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1968</td>

          <td class="item12">Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development</td>

          <td class="item12">Arabic States</td>

          <td class="item12">22</td>

          <td class="item12">$9.87 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.5 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">No rating</td>

          <td class="item12">Kuwait City, Kuwait</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1974</td>

          <td class="item12">Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">18</td>

          <td class="item12">$4 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$565 million</td>

          <td class="item12">No rating</td>

          <td class="item12">Khartoum, Sudan</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1974</td>

          <td class="item12">Islamic Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Islamic States</td>

          <td class="item12">57</td>

          <td class="item12">$70 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.1 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Jeddah, Saudi Arabia</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1975</td>

          <td class="item12">Nordic Investment Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Nordic and Baltic States+</td>

          <td class="item12">8</td>

          <td class="item12">$6.9 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$4.9 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Helsinki, Finland</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1976</td>

          <td class="item12">OPEC Fund for International Development</td>

          <td class="item12">Global</td>

          <td class="item12">12</td>

          <td class="item12">$4.26 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.5 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">No rating</td>

          <td class="item12">Vienna, Austria</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1977</td>

          <td class="item12">International Fund for Agricultural Development</td>

          <td class="item12">Global</td>

          <td class="item12">177</td>

          <td class="item12">$8.05 billion (paid-in only)</td>

          <td class="item12">$3.3 billion (2016–18)</td>

          <td class="item12">No rating</td>

          <td class="item12">Rome, Italy</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">2014</td>

          <td class="item12">New Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12"><abbr>BRICS</abbr></td>

          <td class="item12">5</td>

          <td class="item12">$50 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$4.6 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AA+</td>

          <td class="item12">Shanghai, China</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">2015</td>

          <td class="item12">Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Asia and Oceania</td>

          <td class="item12">97</td>

          <td class="item12">$96.7 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$7.5 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AAA</td>

          <td class="item12">Beijing, China</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <div class="source">
      Source: Annual Reports.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      The Arab-led group of MDBs include the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (<abbr>AFESD</abbr>), Arab
      Bank for Economic Development in Africa (<abbr>BADEA</abbr>), Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), and OPEC Fund for
      International Development (OFID). They are closely associated and emerged within several years of each other
      between 1968 and 1976, in large part catalysed by rapid capital accumulation in oil exporting Arab countries. It
      is not an Arab-only grouping, comprising Islamic and oil-exporting elements, but Arab countries are at their
      heart. The Nordic group evolved from the Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) established in 1975 and was later joined by
      affiliated Nordic multilateral institutions. It is positioned within Nordic development cooperation arrangements
      and is led by Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden with support from the Baltic states: Latvia,
      Lithuania, and Estonia. It promotes development in the Nordic-Baltic region and globally. The third group
      comprises the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>-led New Development Bank (NDB) and China-led <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, established in
      2014 and 2015. They are expressions of the burgeoning influence of emerging economies in the 21st century and
      have sparked an exhaustive debate about whether they reinforce or challenge the Global North-led status quo. More
      to the point, as Humphrey (2019, 165) contends, the <a class="item2"></a>‘recent creation of the’ NDB and
      <abbr>AIIB</abbr> shows that ‘MDBs appear to have continued relevance in global development finance.’
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      The specialised development banks are niche development financiers, with each of their mandates revealing much
      about their role. The <abbr>CEB</abbr> helps European countries manage the social impact of refugees and
      displaced persons as well as ecological disasters and IFAD mobilises concessional resources for agricultural
      development. IsDB supports economic and social progress in accordance with Shari’ah financial principles, the
      Nordic Development Fund (NDF) – an affiliate of the Nordic grouping – has since 2009 specialised in the provision
      of grants for climate change interventions in low-income countries, and the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr> both
      support sustainable infrastructure financing. There are grey areas where some of the specialised banks could be
      labelled RDBs or SRDBs, for example, the NIB began from Nordic regional arrangements. Nonetheless, given their
      niche mandates, the nine MDBs discussed in this chapter are best positioned typologically as specialised
      development banks.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      Apart from the <abbr>CEB</abbr> and IFAD, the other specialised development banks represent Nordic, Arab, and
      emerging economy influence, as noted above. This point is worth further elaboration, particularly since the
      Nordic development model is distinct from that of the US and Western Europe, the Arab-led MDBs often support Arab
      solidarity, and the emerging economies offer a geopolitical alternative to Global North-led finance. The
      following section explores these alternative sources of development finance, before the remainder of the chapter
      provides an analytical overview of the specialised MDBs, beginning chronologically with the <abbr>CEB</abbr> and
      concluding with the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.1 Alternative sources of development finance</h2>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">8.1.1 <a class="item6"></a>Nordic development finance</h3>

        <div class="item">
          The Nordic countries – Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden – have a strong reputation for their
          social democratic and regulatory systems, consistently high human development rankings, and eco- and
          climate-friendly outlook (Clement 2004). Compounded by their standing as ‘honest brokers’ and ‘faithful
          implementers’ of international norms and rules, they have built considerable trustworthiness in their
          bilateral and multilateral interactions with less developed countries (Bengtsson, Elgstrom, and Tallberg
          2004, 312). Broadly defined by ‘human internationalism’ (Engh and Pharo 2009), the foreign aid and
          development assistance programmes of the <a class="item2"></a>Nordic countries have long promoted poverty
          alleviation as both a moral obligation and a benefit to aid donors as much as aid recipients (Stokke 1989).
          Poverty alleviation, social welfare, environmental protection, good governance, and human rights typically
          characterise Nordic aid, with each Nordic country delivering their own national aid programmes as well as
          collaborating multilaterally through the Nordic Finance Group.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Inter-Nordic cooperation has seen largely consistent progress since the end of the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War, encompassing finance and trade, collective security, and environment and
          development (Czarny 2017). There have been ebbs and flows, however, with tensions created during the
          <a class="item2"></a>Cold War and by European Union (EU) accession. Despite these, multilateral engagement
          within the Nordic region remains strong, with Forsberg (2013) arguing that it stems not only from
          institutions, like the Nordic Council (founded in 1952) and Nordic Council of Ministers (established in
          1971), but also a shared ‘Nordic identity’. In the context of multilateral development assistance, the Nordic
          Finance Group illustrates <a class="item2"></a>inter-Nordic cooperation.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Ørvik (1974, 88) made the prophetic claim that the ‘seventies may well become a watershed in Nordic regional
          cooperation.’ From a multilateral development finance (MDF) standpoint, this was very accurate. Following the
          NIB’s establishment in 1975, there came the Nordic Project Fund (<a class="item2"></a>Nopef) in 1982, NDF in
          1988, and Nordic Environment Finance Corporation (NEFCO) in 1990; collectively, they comprise Nordic Finance
          Group. The Nordic countries are generally more progressive than OECD and EU donors in their foreign aid, well
          exceeding average official development assistance (<a class="item2"></a>ODA) contributions and donating more
          than other European countries to multilateral organisations. They are also distinct from US and Western
          European aid models, with a reputation as ‘soft donors’ that rely on recipient terms rather than dictating
          conditions (Danielson and Wohlgemuth 2003, Elgström and Delputte 2016). Further, the Nordic countries
          ‘publicly assumed the role of bridge-builders between developing and industrialised countries’ during African
          decolonisation (Engh and Pharo 2009, 115). The <a class="item2"></a>Swedish International Development
          Cooperation Agency’s (SIDA) engagement with African SRDBs and the appointment of two Nordic citizens to run
          the East African Development Bank (<abbr>EADB</abbr>) are examples of this trend. In addition, foreign aid
          served as a connecting node between African and Nordic countries and many ‘diplomatic missions in African
          countries were only established after the [Nordic] aid agencies were located there’ (Selbervik and Nygaard
          2006, 22). Nordic aid has had its controversies, notably a joint Nordic development aid project established
          in 1968 was tangentially involved in President Julius Nyerere’s <em class="calibre4">ujamaa</em> peasant village programme
          that used force and coercion to become one of Africa’s largest resettlement efforts (see Paaskesen 2010).
          But, overall, the legacy of Nordic development cooperation is positive, standing as a viable (if smaller)
          alternative to other Western aid programmes.
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">8.1.2 <a class="item6"></a>Arab development finance</h3>

        <div class="item">
          Regional integration and cooperation between Arab countries began in 1945 with the <a class="item2"></a>founding of the Arab League, a time when the countries of the Middle East were ranked among the
          lowest levels of socioeconomic development globally (Yousef 2004). It was spurred by Arab nationalism,
          anti-colonial sentiment, and backed by oil wealth and institutionalised through successive initiatives in the
          1950s. The intent was to strengthen the structural position of the region (Corm 2006, Worrall 2017), and
          development finance formed one pillar.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Since the 1970s, Arab ODA has exceeded the average among OECD countries. Although peaking in the 1970s and
          1980s, Arab ODA averaged 13% of global ODA and 75% of non-OECD ODA between <a class="item2"></a>1973 and
          2008, with most aid being untied and without conditions (Kellerman 2019, Rouis et al. 2010, Shushan and
          Marcoux 2011, Tok, Calleja, and El-Ghaish 2014, ). Like the Nordic countries, Arab development finance offers
          an alternative investment stream, particularly to countries that are not allies of OECD donors, especially
          the US.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the UAE-lead <a class="item2"></a>Arab ODA and the Arab MDBs. There is a complex
          network of bilateral and multilateral Arab development organisations, which is unified under the Coordination
          Secretariat for Arab National and Regional Development Institutions. The Coordination Secretariat was
          established under the auspices of the <abbr>AFESD</abbr> in 1975 to coordinate Arab aid and avoid resource
          duplication – although, in practice, its power is limited to data collection and dissemination. It comprises
          three <a class="item2"></a>national development agencies – the <a class="item2"></a>Kuwait Fund for Arab
          Economic Development (1961), <a class="item2"></a>Abu Dhabi Fund for Development (1971), and <a class="item2"></a>Saudi Fund for Development (1974) – and four MDBs – the <abbr>AFESD</abbr>, <abbr>BADEA</abbr>,
          IsDB, and OFID – and also the IMF-like Arab Monetary Fund (<abbr>AMF</abbr>) and other bodies (Fritz and
          Mühlich 2019, Momani and Ennis 2012, Rouis et al. 2010, Shushan and Marcoux 2011, Zimmermann and Smith 2011).
          While the IsDB and OFID are not Arab-only MDBs, Arab countries are among their largest shareholders (Neumayer
          2003).
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The emergence of so many Arab <a class="item2"></a>development organisations in the 1960s and 1970s was
          prompted by the <a class="item2"></a>1967 Arab-Israeli War and 1973 oil price shock, as well as broader
          attempts to further Arab foreign policy, promote regional stability and solidarity, and establish an
          alternative to Global North-led finance (El Mallakh and Kadhim 1976, Neumayer 2003). Tudoroiu (2012, 25–6)
          argues that the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) can be understood as a mirror of the
          <abbr>BRICS</abbr> in that both groupings are heterogeneous and ‘the creation of OPEC was due to Third World
          <a class="item2"></a>nationalism directed against Western economic neo-colonialism,’ just as the
          formalisation of the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> was to carve out space for emerging economies. Further, both
          <a class="item2"></a>OPEC and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> exercise financial and geopolitical influence. The
          Arab-Israeli War led to an expansion of Arab foreign aid as oil-exporters not directly participating in the
          conflict – Kuwait, Libya, and Saudi Arabia – offered financial support to countries such as Jordan, Egypt,
          and Syria that suffered heavy economic and human losses (Corm 2006, Porter 1986, Williams 1976).
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The <a class="item2"></a>1973 oil shock prompted a major expansion of Arab MDF. The oil-rich Arab countries
          used some of their vast petrodollar reserves as aid to (i) offset potential negative political fallout from
          oil-importing countries suffering financial decline from oil price spikes and (ii) to dissuade the Global
          North and South that oil reserves were being used as an economic ‘weapon’ (Corm 2006, El Mallakh and Kadhim
          1976, Porter 1986, Shushan and Marcoux 2011). Equally, though, key Western powers encouraged many of these
          ventures as outlined in <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a>. As Corm (2006, 294) argues, Arab aid was not only
          political but at the time ‘Arab oil-exporting countries did not have the capacity to absorb the new financial
          flows that were accruing to them,’ a situation similar to that of China in the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>. The
          resultant petrodollars were not just used in aid but invested in Northern banks, which became a key driver of
          the 1982 debt crisis.
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          Arab countries received 62% of Arab ODA between 1970 and 2008, followed by Asian and African countries with
          large Muslim populations (Momani and Ennis 2012). A ‘striking feature of Arab aid is its high volatility…
          Arab aid has had huge swings over the years, and changes in oil prices seem to be the major driving factor’
          (Villanger 2007, 228). Cumulative Arab ODA increased from $7.7 billion between 1970 and 1974 to $32.7 billion
          from 1980 to 1984, and then declined to $6.8 billion between 1995 and 1999 as oil prices fell. Next, it
          rapidly increased to $15.7 billion as oil prices spiked between 2000 and 2004 (Corm 2006). The four Arab MDBs
          are financed from capital subscriptions and loan repayments and thus are fairly sheltered from oil price
          fluctuations (Rouis et al. 2010).
        </div>
      </section>

      <section>
        <h3 class="item7">8.1.3 <a class="item6"></a><abbr class="calibre8">BRICS</abbr> development finance</h3>

        <div class="item">
          The <abbr>BRIC</abbr> acronym was coined by Goldman Sachs Chief Economist Jim O’Neill in 2001, describing
          countries ‘with the most potential for growth in the first half of the twenty-first century, based on
          demography, the size of potential markets, recent growth rates, and the embrace of globalisation’ (Robinson
          2015, 4). At first used as an investment strategy, the 2008 <a class="item2"></a>Global Financial Crisis
          (GFC) catalysed the formalisation of the grouping as the crisis undermined the Global North’s paradigmatic
          credibility (Cammack 2018, Duggan 2015, Stuenkel 2015, Tudoroiu 2012). With the 2010 admission of South
          Africa, the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> built new institutional arrangements, including the NDB and Contingent Reserve
          Arrangement (<a class="item2"></a>CRA) – an IMF-style $100 billion fund that member countries can draw from
          in financial emergencies – and they are all members of the China-led <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, while India, Brazil,
          and South Africa comprise the IBSA Dialogue Forum. We agree with the argument that the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> do
          not intend to displace the capitalist status quo (see Harmer and Buse 2014, Nayyar 2016, Robinson 2015,
          Thakur 2014, Tudoroiu 2012). Instead, they ‘pose a within-system challenge… they challenge its most liberal
          content, while becoming dependent on, and engaging with, its existing institutional structures’ (Stephen
          2014, 914). Nevertheless, the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> demonstrate an ‘aspiration to be “rule makers” instead of
          “rule takers”’ (Duggan 2015, 17).
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The <a class="item2"></a>rise and sustainability of the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> have been exhaustively reviewed
          over the past two decades. Some economic analyses claim that the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> are finished because they
          have not been able to maintain predicted growth rates (see Sharma 2012), even though they recovered quickly
          after the GFC (Chen and De Lombaerde 2014). Such analyses overlook the fact that the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> are
          more than simply an investment strategy; they are a formalised grouping and they are actively changing global
          governance. Yet, their institutionalisation runs into difficulties given their disparate cultures, politics,
          and demographics. South Africa, as an example, has often been regarded an odd choice for the grouping, given
          its relative economic size. However, its inclusion reflects a logic of having strategic influence in
          sub-Saharan Africa, and South Africa has a leading role in the Southern African Development Community and
          African Union as well as being the only African country in the G20 (Petropoulos 2015, Tella 2017). Further,
          Russia has been constrained by low oil prices and Western sanctions (Stephen 2017) and Brazil under President
          Jair Bolsarno has created tensions by aligning closely with US President <a class="item2"></a>Donald Trump,
          hence some of their original unity has dissipated with political changes. The <abbr>BRICS</abbr> additionally
          display ‘various symptoms of internal crisis and socioeconomic oppression… including severe inequality,
          poverty, unemployment, diseases, violence… inadequate education and prohibitions on labour organising… [and]
          worsening political and civil rights violations’ (Bond 2013, 267).
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          The <a class="item2"></a>development agenda of the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> illustrates both their role as
          alternative sources of finance and their strategic pursuit of their own foreign policy interests, as well as
          some challenge to Global North donors (Chin 2014, Gu et al. 2016, Naim 2007, Tok, Calleja, and El-Ghaish
          2014, 595, Woods 2008). In founding of the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, it has been usefully suggested that the
          <abbr>BRICS</abbr> are not restructuring the world economy but positioning themselves more influentially
          within it. They do not want to supplant the existing system because they benefit from its institutions (Qobo
          and Soko 2015, Zavyalova 2016).
        </div>

        <div class="item1">
          China, as the centrepiece of the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>, is particularly relevant to MDF. The NDB and
          <abbr>AIIB</abbr> are ‘entwined with the Belt and Road Initiative (<a class="item2"></a>BRI) – a vast
          infrastructure-building, trade, and investment strategy that Beijing launched in 2013’ (Kalathil 2018, 52).
          Notably, however, the new MDBs are but one facet of Chinese development assistance, with finance moving in
          larger volumes through the China Development Bank and Export-Import Bank. This finance is generally well
          received by many developing countries given it lacks the conditionality of Global North-led MDF (Chin and
          Gallagher 2019, 246). Significantly, Chinese development assistance almost exclusively focusses on
          infrastructure investment.
        </div>
      </section>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.2 <a class="item6"></a>Council of Europe Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Established in 1956, the <abbr>CEB</abbr> is Europe’s first MDB and the world’s second after the IBRD. While
        its European geographical focus suggests it could be labelled an RDB, its social mandate situates it better as
        a specialised bank: the
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          primary purpose of the Bank is to help in solving the social problems with which European countries are or
          may be faced as a result of the presence of refugees, displaced persons or migrants consequent upon movements
          of refugees or other forced movements of populations and as a result of the presence of victims of natural or
          ecological disasters.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (<abbr>CEB</abbr> 2019)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        The impetus for <abbr>CEB</abbr> was the movement of large numbers of refugees and displaced persons into
        Western Europe after the Second World War. Nonetheless, it was structured as an MDB with an initial $6.7
        million capital base obtained from member subscriptions. Of that amount, 25% was immediately paid up and the
        remaining 75% fully paid by 1960. This high level of paid-in capital enabled <abbr>CEB</abbr> to borrow from
        <a class="item2"></a>capital markets (Bussière and Willaert 2006, 24). In 2017, <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s subscribed
        capital base was €5.5 billion, ranking it broadly in the middle of the specialised development banks, although
        far smaller than the IsDB, NDB, and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The Council of Europe was established in 1949 and today operates as Europe’s leading human rights organisation.
        The <abbr>CEB</abbr> was founded several years by the then eight Council members, with <abbr>CEB</abbr>
        ‘attached to the Council of Europe and administered under its supreme authority’ (<abbr>CEB</abbr> 2019),
        although the MDB was financially and legally independent. The Council emerged from political cooperation after
        the Second World War, with the 1948 <a class="item2"></a>Brussels Pact countries – Britain, France, Belgium,
        the Netherlands, and Luxembourg – coming together with Italy, Ireland, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden in May 1949
        to establish it. By 1950, the Council expanded to include Greece, Turkey, Iceland, and West Germany.
        Resettlement of displaced persons and refugees was prioritised by Council members, as were initiatives to
        promote human and social rights (Bussière and Willaert 2006).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Pierre Schneiter was appointed as the Special Council of Europe Representative for National Refugees and
        Over-Population in December 1953 to investigate the feasibility of establishing an organisation to manage
        <a class="item2"></a>European resettlement issues. Schneiter concluded that a socially oriented bank led by the
        Council would be most appropriate, financing resettlement actions and building employment opportunities
        (Bussière and Willaert 2006). After tensions were resolved between Council members over financial questions,
        the <abbr>CEB</abbr> was signed into effect on 16 April 1956 by West Germany, France, Belgium, Greece, Iceland,
        Italy, Luxembourg, and Turkey. Notably, the UK, although a Council of Europe founding member, did not join.
        When first established, <abbr>CEB</abbr> was called the Council of Europe Resettlement Fund for National
        Refugees and Over-Population in Europe, with the name change in 1999 to better reflect both its growth into an
        MDB and its revised strategic focus on development concerns beyond resettlement.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The first decade of operations addressed post-Second World War resettlement, but <abbr>CEB</abbr> became less
        relevant during the 1970s and 1980s as the inter-European movement of people stabilised. Still, it had a
        tenfold increase in annual approvals and diversified its loan portfolio to sectors not traditionally associated
        with resettlement such as housing. The end of the <a class="item2"></a>Cold War renewed the MDB’s relevance; a
        focus on post-Soviet transition became a masthead in the 1990s and 2000s, with <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>2005–9 <a class="item2"></a>Development Plan prioritising its 20 new members mostly situated in
        Central and Eastern Europe that joined after 1991 (Bussière and Willaert 2006). <a class="item2"></a>Successive
        <a class="item2"></a>Council of Europe Summits revised the <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s mandate: 1993 <a class="item2"></a>Vienna Summit – promoting regional collaboration; 1997 Strasbourg Summit – strengthening European
        social cohesion; and 2005 Warsaw Summit – building a free, democratic, and more inclusive Europe. The Bank’s
        current priorities include sustainable and inclusive growth, job creation, public infrastructure, gender
        equality, the integration of refugees, displaced persons, and migrants, and climate change mitigation and
        adaptation. The <abbr>CEB</abbr> today increasingly resembles a traditional MDB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>CEB</abbr> has 42 <a class="item2"></a>member states, with admission eligibility contingent on
        membership in the Council of Europe, which has 47 members. Prior to Brexit, Austria and the UK were the only EU
        members not in it. All member countries are eligible to receive <abbr>CEB</abbr> loans, a contrast to the IBRD
        where lending is reserved for countries below a GNI threshold. Like the European Investment Bank (EIB),
        <abbr>CEB</abbr> is exclusively owned by regional European members; there are no non-regional shareholders.
        Germany, France, and Italy are the largest shareholders – each holding over 16% voting share – followed by
        Spain and Turkey. Over half of the remaining member countries each control less than 1% shareholding.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As per <a class="item2">Table 8.2</a>, five Governors have led the <abbr>CEB</abbr>, with appointee nationality
        alternating between two of the three largest shareholders: France and Germany. The first Governor, René Plas,
        called the Resettlement Fund an ‘organisation for human solidarity on a banking basis’ (cited in
        <abbr>CEB</abbr> 2016a, 1), demonstrating both Keynesian ideals and the legacy of the banking model. Rolf
        Wenzel is the incumbent Governor and he previously served in Germany’s Federal Ministry for Finance, as Senior
        Advisor to Germany’s IMF Executive Director, and as an Asian Development Bank (<abbr>AsDB</abbr>) Director,
        again demonstrating MDB networks. Wenzel (cited in International Banker 2017) highlighted the benefits of the
        banking model when he said that the
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          <abbr>CEB</abbr> is a self-financing institution, so there are no demands on its members for capital beyond
          their subscribed capital contributions. The bank is financially sound, has a solid loan portfolio, and has no
          default or arrears on its loans. It also maintains a prudent financial strategy and an efficient
          risk-management framework.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Wenzel’s predecessor Raphaël Alomar similarly noted in 2004 that <abbr>CEB</abbr> ‘intends to enhance its
        capacity as a development bank’ by strengthening its expertise and intensifying ‘pre-existing close
        partnerships with other financial as well as non-financial international institutions’ (cited in
        <abbr>CEB</abbr> 2004, 11).
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 8.2</em> Council of Europe Development Bank Governors</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">Governor</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">René Plas</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">1956–68</td>

            <td class="item12">Guided the Resettlement Fund through its first decade, setting the tone of the
            organisation.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Charles-Henri Bonfils</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">1968–78</td>

            <td class="item12">Supervised the admission of new member countries and the diversification of operations
            to prioritise social housing, vocational training, and territorial development.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Roger Vanden Branden</td>

            <td class="item12">German</td>

            <td class="item12">1979–93</td>

            <td class="item12">Presided over an uneventful 1980s, noted mainly for a tenfold expansion of assets and
            loans achieved through the admission of new members and capital increases.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Raphaël Alomar</td>

            <td class="item12">French</td>

            <td class="item12">1993–2011</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw a significant overhaul of the <abbr>CEB</abbr>, including the name change to
            better reflect its MDB status, and helped tackle the post-Soviet transition, the introduction of the MDGs,
            and the onset of the 2008 GFC and 2009 Eurozone Crisis.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Rolf Wenzel</td>

            <td class="item12">German</td>

            <td class="item12">2011–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Integrated the SDGs into <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s operational mandate and directed significant
            resources to the ongoing refugee crisis, particularly through the Migrant and Refugee Fund established in
            October 2015.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and <abbr>CEB</abbr> Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the IBRD, <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s main lending instruments are <a class="item2"></a>project and programme
        loans. Funds are raised on international capital markets and, in 2017, <abbr>CEB</abbr> issued its first social
        inclusion bond. The MDB finances up to 50% of project costs and programme loans are disbursed in tranches
        (<abbr>CEB</abbr> 2017). It is supported by two financing facilities: the European Co-Financing Facility, which
        focusses on facilitating borrower absorption of EU grants, and the Public Sector Finance Facility.
        <abbr>CEB</abbr> also provides technical and advisory services to ensure project feasibility and loan
        repayment, just like most other MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1956 and 2017, <abbr>CEB</abbr> disbursed over €41 billion. From 2008 to 2017, it averaged €2.47
        billion in annual loan approvals and €1.83 billion in disbursements, with both increasing substantially since
        2016 – from €2.3 billion (31 projects) in 2015 to €3.45 billion (35 projects) in 2016 to €3.9 billion (41
        projects) in 2017 – in response to the 2015 Syrian Refugee Crisis. Indeed, <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s 2017–19
        Development Plan was drafted in response to the Crisis, which saw the largest movement of refugees into Europe
        since the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War (<abbr>CEB</abbr> 2016b).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, <abbr>CEB</abbr> is a relatively small MDB compared to the RDBs, but it is comparable to many of
        the larger SRDBs. Despite its social mandate, its organisational structure and operational guidelines reveal it
        to be an investment-oriented MDB, prioritising <a class="item2"></a>economic growth through small and medium
        enterprises (SMEs), job creation, physical infrastructure, and housing. It also collaborates extensively with
        financial intermediaries – an approach the large MDBs are now increasingly taking – and relies on joint-venture
        financing to deliver its projects. Thus, despite its specialised mandate, it sits comfortably within the
        standard MDB framework, reflecting many common organisational traits.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.3 <a class="item6"></a>Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <a class="item2"></a>Agreement Establishing <abbr>AFESD</abbr> was adopted by the Economic and Social
        Council of the Arab League on 16 May 1968, making it the first Arab-led MDB, although the agreement only became
        effective on 18 December 1971 (Rouis et al. 2010). It commenced operations in 1974. As per its original
        Articles of Agreement, its purposes were to participate in the ‘financing of economic and social development
        projects in the Arab states and countries’ by financing ‘economic projects of an investment character’ and
        delivering technical assistance to public and private enterprises. At the time of its establishment, it
        differed from the national Arab development funds and most MDBs, with the exception of <abbr>CEB</abbr>, in
        that ‘social projects’ were explicitly mandated (Porter 1986, Tok, Calleja, and El-Ghaish 2014). The original
        Articles were amended in 1997 following a study sanctioned by the Board of Governors to investigate how it
        could better support the Arab private sector (<abbr>AFESD</abbr> 1997). The revised Articles expand its mandate
        to finance private sector projects, establish and participate in equity capital, and establish and manage
        special funds. This aligned its lending operations to reflect contemporary mainstream MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Unlike IsDB and OFID but like <abbr>BADEA</abbr>, the <abbr>AFESD</abbr> is an exclusively Arab- led
        development bank, with shareholder eligibility contingent on <a class="item2"></a>Arab League membership. It
        has an entirely regional and borrowing membership, currently consisting of the 22 Arab League member states.
        Consistent with trends in Arab bilateral and multilateral development assistance, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are
        the largest shareholders, with Kuwait being responsible for submitting the original proposal for
        <abbr>AFESD</abbr> to the Arab League in the late 1960s (Shushan and Marcoux 2011).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A Director General leads the <abbr>AFESD</abbr> and chairs the <a class="item2"></a>Board of Directors. There
        have been three Directors General. Incumbent Director General Abdlatif Al-Hamad has led <abbr>AFESD</abbr>
        since 1985, a long-term appointment rare among the MDBs, though IsDB is similar. Interviews conducted with
        Al-Hamad by Villanger (2007, 242) revealed the significance of <abbr>AFESD</abbr>: ‘recipient countries facing
        severe conditions for receiving finance from the WB/IMF have turned to Arab donors to get the same finance
        without having to implement any conditions.’
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AFESD</abbr> provides financing to <a class="item2"></a>public sector projects on concessional terms
        and to private sector projects promoting private sector development, as well as through a special account to
        fund small- and medium-sized projects, which was established in 2009 (Shushan and Marcoux 2011, 1970). In 2016,
        it softened its lending terms and reduced interest rates for low-income and other member countries. In
        addition, it provides a suite of technical and advisory services to support project feasibility.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1974 and 2017, <abbr>AFESD</abbr> approved 663 <a class="item2"></a>loans totalling $32 billion, with
        infrastructure projects receiving close to 71% of all approvals (Engen and Prizzon 2018). As Corm (2006, 308)
        argues, <abbr>AFESD</abbr>’s ‘basic activities are to provide soft lending to Arab League countries for
        infrastructure projects,’ with an emphasis on regional infrastructure projects such as those ‘promoting the
        inter-Arab grid to connect national electricity systems.’ Rouis et al. (2010, 26) expands this point,
        commenting that a
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          landmark of <abbr>AFESD</abbr>’s contribution to Arab regional integration is the financing of the Arab
          Electricity Grids Interconnection Projects. Over the past ten years, total investment from all sources in
          these projects has reached US$ 1 billion… <abbr>AFESD</abbr> has contributed over two thirds of the financing
          of these projects on concessional terms.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Oman, and Mauritania have been the largest recipients of <abbr>AFESD</abbr>
        disbursements. Cumulative loan approvals nearly doubled between 2007 and 2017, reflecting its capital base
        reaching $10 billion. Further, like many other MDBs, it has promoted co-financing to deliver its development
        projects. Between 1974 and 2016, over 11% of <abbr>AFESD</abbr> co-financing was with the World Bank, IFAD, and
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and over 56% with Arab national and regional development institutions.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Qatar have not received loans from <abbr>AFESD</abbr> but have received
        grants, demonstrating that even the wealthiest oil-exporting shareholders can benefit from it. Every other
        member country – except for Comoros, with which it has had very limited engagement – has received both loans
        and grants. As of 2017, Palestine had received only five loans but 173 grants totalling over $92 million,
        reflecting Arab concern for the territory. Between 2001 and 2010, it allocated 10% of its yearly net income to
        the Palestinian Authority and, from 1974 to 2007, 19% of <abbr>AFESD</abbr> grants were allocated to the West
        Bank and Gaza (Rouis et al. 2010).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, while it is a relatively small specialised development bank, reflecting the subscribed capital and
        annual approvals of an SRDB, the <abbr>AFESD</abbr> has nonetheless performed an important role as a niche
        financier of Arab integration, mirroring the <abbr>CEB</abbr>’s social mandate.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.4 Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <abbr>BADEA</abbr> was the second MDB established by the Arab League. It was formed on 18 February 1974
        when its <a class="item2"></a>establishing agreement was signed, and it began operations in March 1975. It was
        the first inter-regional bank founded to build ‘Arab and African solidarity’ (Neumayer 2003, 136), emerging in
        part because the 1973 oil price shock severely impacted many African economies (Johnson 1983). Politically,
        <abbr>BADEA</abbr> aimed to curtail Israel’s influence in Africa, with Uganda being the first country to break
        ties with Israel in 1972. BABEA thus represented both the expansion of Arab capital in line with the region’s
        growing petrodollar reserves and a political tool to build Arab-African cooperation to minimise Israel’s
        influence following the 1973 Arab-Israeli War (Johnson 1983, Porter 1986, Shushan and Marcoux 2011).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>BADEA</abbr>’s (2009) objective ‘is to foster economic, financial and technical cooperation between
        Africa countries and Arab World countries,’ drawing Arab public and private investment into African natural
        resources and extractives (Johnson 1983, Porter 1986, Shushan and Marcoux 2011). The <a class="item2"></a>beneficiaries of <abbr>BADEA</abbr> operations may include African governments, public and private
        companies operating in African countries in which African governments or citizen have a majority capital
        shareholding, and mixed Arab-African companies pursuing development outcomes (<abbr>BADEA</abbr> 2009).
        <abbr>BADEA</abbr> encourages Arab-African trade by financing Arab exports into Africa and, in the mid-2000s,
        it began offering concessional loans (Shushan and Marcoux 2011). The mandate on Arab-African cooperation makes
        it a specialised development bank.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>BADEA</abbr>’s shareholders are 18 Arab League member countries. The five largest shareholders (in
        order) are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Libya, Iraq, and the UAE. Collectively, these countries hold over 77%
        shareholding, with Saudi Arabia controlling close one quarter. All shareholders are Arab countries, whereas
        African non-members are the recipients of <abbr>BADEA</abbr>’s financial and technical assistance; the
        borrowers do not have any voting power – it is very much a donor led MDB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A Director General leads the <abbr>BADEA</abbr>, who is appointed from the non-permanent members of the Board
        of Directors. The Board has eleven members, with the nine largest shareholders holding permanent seats and the
        smaller member countries jointly selecting two non-permanent representatives. Since 1974, five Director
        Generals have led <abbr>BADEA</abbr>, each from a different country (see <a class="item2">Table 8.3</a>). In
        line with South-South cooperation ideals, Dr Chedly Ayari, the first Director General, commented in 1975 that
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          Our intention is… to put Afro-Arab cooperation on the map as a dimension of international economic
          cooperation which all countries, especially the rich industrial nations, must reckon with. Arab aid and
          cooperation efforts should be in a context of a new world economic order, based on equality and justice.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (cited in Johnson 1983, 625)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Such rhetoric has been repeated in the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 8.3</em> Arab Bank for economic development in Africa Director Generals</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">Director Generals</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Dr Chedly Ayari</td>

            <td class="item12">Tunisian</td>

            <td class="item12">1974–87</td>

            <td class="item12">Had an academic career in economics and law. Served as: World Bank Executive Director
            and <abbr>AfDB</abbr> Board member in the 1960s; Tunisian Minister of Planning (1969–70 and 1974–5);
            Minister of Economy (1972–4); and Governor of the Central Bank of Tunisia (2012–18). Due to ‘administrative
            differences,’ the <abbr>BADEA</abbr> Board of Governors placed Ayari on leave in April 1987. These mainly
            concerned Ayari’s promotion of increased commitments to African countries when shareholders wanted to limit
            funding to guarantee loan repayments. Ayari ‘sought to give the Bank… a larger role in Arab development
            than the 19 member-states have been willing to allow’ (Johnson, 1983, 625).</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Ahmed Al Harti Al Wardi</td>

            <td class="item12">Moroccan</td>

            <td class="item12">1988–97</td>

            <td class="item12">Appointed Director General during a tense period between the Board of Governors and
            senior management, leading to a redefinition of the Director General’s role to be subject to greater
            oversight by the Governors.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Ustaz Medhat Sami Lofti</td>

            <td class="item12">Egyptian</td>

            <td class="item12">1997–2006</td>

            <td class="item12">Modestly expanded annual lending approvals from $120 million in 2000 to $163 million in
            2006, with the infrastructure sector receiving over half of annual commitments.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Abdel Aziz Khelef</td>

            <td class="item12">Algerian</td>

            <td class="item12">2006–15</td>

            <td class="item12">Served in the Algerian Department of Industry and Energy in the 1970s and as Algerian
            Minister of Commerce (1980–86), Minister of Finance (1986–88), Secretary of State for Maghrebi Affair
            (1989–91), Secretary General of the Presidency of the Republic (1991–92), and Minister Delegate for Maghreb
            Cooperation and Affairs (1992–93). He also worked for IsDB (1994–2006).</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Dr Sidi Ould Tah</td>

            <td class="item12">Mauritanian</td>

            <td class="item12">2015–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Prior appointments: Mauritanian Bank for Development and Commerce (1984–6); financial
            analyst, Food Security Commission (1986); advisor, Director General and Director, Internal Auditing
            Department, Nouakchott Port Authority (1988–96); Investment Promotion Officer then Technical Assistant to
            IsDB President (1999–2006); advisor, Mauritanian President and Prime Minister (2006–8); and Minister of
            Economy and Finance (2008–15), representing Mauritania in the World Bank and several RDBs, SRDBs, and
            specialised banks.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and <abbr>BADEA</abbr> Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1975 and 2018, <abbr>BADEA</abbr> approved over 660 projects totalling $4.8 billion (<abbr>BADEA</abbr>
        2018), with infrastructure projects receiving 51.6% of total loan commitments. Compared to other MDBs, it is a
        small development financier: $125 million via 16 projects in 2000, $192 million via 23 projects in 2010, and
        $320 million via 23 projects in 2018. Most projects are co-financed and its contribution to project financing
        is limited to 60% of total costs (Rouis et al. 2010). It also offers concessional lending terms to public
        sector projects.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Five-Year Plans govern <abbr>BADEA</abbr>’s operations, with the first plan introduced in 1983 to improve
        resource delivery to recipient countries (Shushan and Marcoux 2011). Each plan is monitored by strict
        performance targets. The seventh Five-Year Plan (2015–19) allotted $1.6 billion to loans, an increase of $600
        million over the previous plan (<abbr>BADEA</abbr> 2015). Of that, $1.1 billion was earmarked for public sector
        projects, $450 million for private sector projects, and $50 million for <a class="item2"></a>technical
        assistance operations. Three pillars underpinned the seventh Plan: support for African development through (i)
        public and private sector project financing, (ii) technical assistance to build human and institutional
        capacity, and (iii) Arab exports to African states; the pillars reiterate <abbr>BADEA</abbr>’s Arab-African
        cooperation mandate as a specialised development bank.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.5 <a class="item6"></a>Islamic Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        An international Islamic financial institution, IsDB’s <a class="item2"></a>Articles of Agreement were ratified
        in 1974 pursuant to the Declaration of Intent issued by the 1973 Conference of Finance Ministers of Muslim
        Countries held in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (Ray and Kamal 2019). The Board of Governors held their inaugural
        meeting in July 1975 and the MDB formally began operations in October. It is unique even among Arab-led
        specialised banks because it aims to foster ‘economic development and social progress [in] member countries and
        Muslim communities individually as well as jointly in accordance with the principles of the Shari’ah’ (IsDB
        2019 emphasis added). Thus, it ‘strictly bans the practice of interest on financial transactions’ (Tok,
        Calleja, and El-Ghaish 2014, 597). Like the RDBs and SRDBs, it promotes national and regional development,
        participates in equity capital, undertakes public and private project investment, manages special funds,
        promotes trade, and conducts research (IsDB 2019). Still, its focus on lending to people from one religion and
        conformance to its religious principles mean it is best understood as a specialised development bank.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        IsDB emerged as a response to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (<a class="item2"></a>OIC) discussing the
        role of a multilateral organisation delivering Shari’ah-compliant financial resources to member countries. The
        idea was initially debated during the 1970 Second Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers and was endorsed by
        King Faisal Bin Abdulaziz of Saudi Arabia (Hernandez and Vadlamannati 2017, Kuhn 1982). It ‘was specifically
        created to bridge the gap between rich and poor Muslim countries’ (Wilson 1989, 444), promoting Islam and
        building Arab solidarity (Villanger 2007). The focus on Shari’ah principles means IsDB has never instituted
        policy-based lending, nor engaged significantly – compared to other MDBs – in financial sector lending given
        the Shari’ah prohibition on excessive speculation (Kellerman 2019, Rouis et al. 2010).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Conformance to <a class="item2"></a>Shari’ah principles has not prevented IsDB from becoming an influential
        MDB. It has developed a suite of innovative lending instruments. During its first decade, it introduced
        short-term trade credits delivered under a service charge, machinery leasing, and private sector equity
        investment arrangements (Porter 1986). Its current modalities include: interest-free loans with a service fee
        to recoup administrative costs of no more than 2.5% per annum; profit-sharing schemes; leasing of capital
        goods; and, receipt of rent from borrowers (Corm 2006, Lessambo 2015, Rouis et al. 2010, Shushan and Marcoux
        2011). It is worth noting that IsDB has been able to pursue these approaches in large part because of the
        petrodollar surpluses of its leading shareholders, notably Saudi Arabia. Yet, in the current low interest rate
        environment, its products are not as competitive as they were.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IsDB has 57 member countries, including Arab and non-Arab shareholders, with membership eligibility
        contingent on being an OIC member. Arab countries are a minority numerically, with non-Arab members from
        Africa, Asia, and Latin America, but they are the largest capital subscribers (Shushan and Marcoux 2011). The
        largest ten shareholders are: Saudi Arabia (23.5%), Libya (9.43%), Iran (8.25%), Nigeria (7.66%), the UAE
        (7.51%), Qatar (7.18%), Egypt (7.07%), Kuwait (6.92%), Turkey (6.25%), and Algeria (2.54%). These shareholders
        hold over 85% of capital subscriptions. Saudi Arabia has exercised considerable influence through its large
        shareholding as well as ISDB’s headquarters being in Jeddah and the only two Presidents both being Saudi
        nationals. As Hernandez and Vadlamannati (2017, 913–4) comment, ‘fulfilling and maintaining its role as a
        leader in Islamic societies is a foreign policy priority for Saudi Arabia and it perceives itself as the
        principal responsible for the development, cooperation and support of the region.’ This foreign policy priority
        echoes that of the US in the World Bank.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The small number of presidents is unusual for an MDB. The first <a class="item2"></a>President, Dr Ahmad
        Mohamed Ali Al Madani, led IsDB from 1975 to 2016; he was re-elected several times. Thus, much of IsDB’s
        history was written by Dr Ali’s leadership. From Saudi Arabia, Dr Ali previously served as Director of the
        Scientific and Islamic Institute in Yemen (1958–9) and Acting Rector of King Abdulaziz University (1967–72). Dr
        Bandar Hajjar succeeded Dr Ali in October 2016. Among other roles, Dr Hajjar once served as Saudi Arabia’s Hajj
        Minister. His IsDB nomination caused discontent due to his alleged mismanagement of the annual Hajj Pilgrimage
        and the 2015 ‘Hajj Stampede’ (Taylor 2015). At the time of his appointment, Dr Hajjar said that IsDB ‘needs to
        shift away from providing individual, small-scale intervention to value chain solutions’ (cited in Zuvela
        2017). This shift became part of an ongoing transformation of IsDB, decentralising its organisational structure
        and altering how it engages with borrowers. Interestingly, as Ray and Kamal (2019, 204 and 206) comment at
        length, day-to-day decisions are overseen by a
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          larger than usual number of engineers and other technical members. The bank more or less relies on the
          judgment of these teams, and thus avoids the need for the Board’s involvement for every project approval.
          Indeed the… IsDB does not have a resident Board. The Directorial Board only gets involved in the approval
          process for projects deemed sensitive.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Over its history, the IsDB evolved into the IsDB Group, comparable to the expansion of the IBRD into the World
        Bank Group. Outlined in <a class="item2">Table 8.4</a>, there are five IsDB <a class="item2"></a>Group
        organisations other than the IsDB. Each organisation in the IsDB Group maintains and emphasises its conformance
        to Shari’ah principles.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 8.4</em> The Islamic Development Bank Group</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">Agency</th>

            <th class="item11">Established</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Islamic Research and Training Institute (IRTI)</td>

            <td class="item12">1981</td>

            <td class="item12">The primary organisational unit for the delivery of Islamic finance research, training,
            information, and advisory and technical assistance. Its priority research areas are innovation and
            stability, human development, and sustainable development.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Islamic Corporation for the Insurance of Investment and Export Credit (ICIEC)</td>

            <td class="item12">1994</td>

            <td class="item12">Provides investment and export credit insurance to Islamic countries, with the aim of
            boosting trade between OIC members. In 2017, 36 member countries benefitted from its insurance products,
            resulting in $11.27 billion in facilitation.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Islamic Corporation for the Development of the Private Sector (ICD)</td>

            <td class="item12">1999</td>

            <td class="item12">Provides finance for private sector projects, promotes competition and entrepreneurship,
            and encourages cross border investments. It has an authorised capital of $4 billion and its shareholders
            are IsDB, 53 Islamic countries, and five public financial institutions.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Solidarity Fund for Development (IFSD)</td>

            <td class="item12">2007</td>

            <td class="item12">Seeks to reduce poverty by promoting pro-poor growth, human development, health care,
            education, and productive and sustainable income and employment. It is designed as a Waqf, or an Islamic
            trust under which all income earned from investments is used to finance future actions. Cumulative
            approvals between 2008 and 2016 totalled $2.8 billion through 106 operations in 33 member countries.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">International Islamic Trade Finance Corporation (ITFC)</td>

            <td class="item12">2008</td>

            <td class="item12">ITFC has consolidated all trade finance business of the IsDB Group, approving $4.48
            billion in 2016.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and IsDB Group Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Cumulative IsDB Group net <a class="item2"></a>lending approvals between 1976 and 2018 were $131.3 billion.
        Whereas IsDB Group approved $4.8 billion during its first decade (1976–85), it approved $84.1 billion between
        2008 and 2018, revealing considerable growth. Notably, annual ITFC approvals have overtaken annual IsDB OCR
        approvals, a rare occurrence in an MDB. ITFC approvals increased from $2.2 billion in 2010 to $5.2 billion in
        2018 compared to a decline in OCR approvals from $5.1 billion in 2014 to $1.1 billion in 2018. The IsDB (2018)
        offers two reasons for these changes. First, between 2017 and 2018 IsDB focussed on project implementation and
        the delivery of previously approved projects with less emphasis on new approvals. Second, ITFC consolidated all
        IsDB Group trade finance and IsDB has advocated for greater trade connections between Islamic countries. An
        additional explanation is that trade financing with its fast turnover is more lucrative for smaller MDBs.
        Co-financing is a large part of IsDB operations. In 2019, OCR approvals were $1.04 billion, with $2.94 billion
        in co-financing; the largest co-financiers were the World Bank Group and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> (IsDB 2020). This
        demonstrates that despite the Shari’ah focus, IsDB is well networked with other MDBs. Indeed, it is quite
        active in several MDB coordination networks.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, IsDB has become an influential and well-respected Arab-led specialised development bank. While
        annual OCR commitments have recently been rivalled by <abbr>AFESD</abbr> and OFID, for several decades it was
        the largest of the Arab-led MDBs. Its conformance to <a class="item2"></a>Shari’ah principles is unique but the
        rapid growth of trade finance via ITFC demonstrates that traditional banking demands of turnover and income
        (perhaps even profits) are not absent.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.6 <a class="item6"></a>Nordic Investment Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden agreed to establish the NIB in 1975 to promote economic growth
        and cooperation between the five Nordic countries. It began operations in 1977. As per its <a class="item2"></a>Establishing Agreement, NIB prioritises investment projects, with financing available based on
        sound banking principles and socioeconomic considerations. Like the EIB, it regards itself more an investment
        bank than a development bank (Normann 2019), though its sectoral focuses resemble the other MDBs (Engen and
        Prizzon 2018). Operations were initially restricted to the Nordic region, but the NIB approved its first
        investment loan outside of its membership area in 1983 and in 1992 participated in the Baltic Investment
        Programme designed to help build the private sectors of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia following independence
        from Soviet rule (Hellén and Eriksson 2011). NIB’s broad mandate today is a prosperous and sustainable
        Nordic-Baltic region, with project finance directed to improving Nordic and Baltic competitiveness and
        environmental sustainability, and is part of an institutionalised ‘Nordic voice,’ underpinned by the ‘common
        values of a democratic tradition, pluralism, environmentalism, and a common sense of solidarity’ (Rūse 2014,
        235). In 2016, Finland’s then Prime Minister Juha Sipilä described the NIB as ‘not only a child of Nordic
        co-operation; today, it is also the most tangible institution of Nordic-Baltic co-operation’ (cited in NIB
        2016).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Attempts to establish a Nordic investment bank had been made in the 1950s, alongside efforts to create a
        customs union. New attempts were made during the 1960s. It was not until the third attempt made in late 1974
        and early 1975 that success followed, formalising Nordic integration (Normann 2019, Wiklund and Sundelius
        1979). The NIB, as it would become, came to be favourably regarded by the Nordic governments as being able to
        effectively coordinate major <a class="item2"></a>investment projects and stave off pressures from high oil
        prices and deteriorating current account balances (Dennis 2015, Normann 2019). This is not to suggest that
        support was uniform; Iceland demonstrated unequivocal support, Finland and Sweden broadly supported it, but
        there was significant resistance from Denmark and Norway and from large Nordic business organisations. Tensions
        focussed on weighted membership representation – given <a class="item2"></a>economic and population size
        disparities between the Nordic countries – and loan eligibility conditions, i.e., the factors considered when
        approving projects (Dennis 2015). In the end, several factors came together to explain why this proposal
        succeeded, including the political costs of failing a third time to establish a Nordic bank, a compressed
        timetable for negotiations, and the proposal not being attached to a complex customs union (Dennis 2015).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The five Nordic countries are the NIB’s <a class="item2"></a>founding members, while the three Baltic states –
        Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia – joined in January 2005. The Baltic states expressed interest in joining after
        receiving loans in the early 1990s (Hellén and Eriksson 2011). In contrast to other MDBs, member shareholdings
        are based on economy size and not share purchases. Sweden is thus the largest shareholder with 34.6% capital
        share, followed by Norway (21.5%) and Denmark (21.1%). Iceland and Estonia are the smallest shareholders,
        holding 0.9% each. Its authorised capital is €6.1 billion and paid-in capital is €418.6 million, which is
        significant given that the NIB can grant loans and guarantees up to 250% of capital reserves (Lessambo 2015).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As per <a class="item2">Table 8.5</a>, five Presidents have led the Bank, one from each of the Nordic states.
        The incumbent President is Henrik Normann, who took office in April 2012. The Office of <a class="item2"></a>President is supported by the Executive Committee, Asset and Liability Committee, Credit Committee,
        Finance Committee, and Business and Technology Committee – a governance structure resembling more an investment
        bank than an MDB. As of December 2018, the NIB employed 199 people in permanent positions, comparable in size
        to most SRDBs, with the average employment length being 12.2 years.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 8.5</em> Nordic Investment Bank Presidents</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">President</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Bert Lindström</td>

            <td class="item12">Swedish</td>

            <td class="item12">1975–86</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw NIB’s establishment, its growth from Nordic-only to non-member lending, secured
            its AAA credit rating, and supervised the doubling of its authorised capital from SDR 400 to 800
            million.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Jannik Lindbæk</td>

            <td class="item12">Norwegian</td>

            <td class="item12">1986–94</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw the expansion of NIB operations into the Baltic region following the collapse of
            the Soviet Union. After his presidential appointment, Lindbæk served as Executive Vice President of the IFC
            from 1994–9. Lindbæk (2010) articulated the necessity of organisations like NIB: ‘There will be a constant
            and growing need in both the public and private sector for long-term financing. That the [EIB] has grown to
            become the world’s biggest bank is indicative of how useful and important IFIs like NIB and EIB are. They
            may be less glamorous than the commercial banks, but they are crucial for economic and social
            development.’</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Jón Sigurðsson</td>

            <td class="item12">Icelandic</td>

            <td class="item12">1994–2005</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw the establishment of a new facility for environmental investment loans in 1997
            and supervised an increase of NIB’s authorised capital to €4 billion in 1999.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Johnny Åkerholm</td>

            <td class="item12">Finnish</td>

            <td class="item12">2005–12</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw a strengthened prioritisation of environmental issues and supervised the 2011
            issuing of the NIB’s first Green Bond. Previously, Åkerholm served as Under-Secretary of State for Economic
            Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Finland (1995–2003) and Secretary General of EBRD.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Henrik Normann</td>

            <td class="item12">Danish</td>

            <td class="item12">2012–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw issue of NIB’s inaugural benchmark environmental bond in 2014 and established an
            Arctic lending facility in 2015 and a special lending facility to invest in green bonds issued by companies
            and municipalities in member countries in 2016. Prior to NIB, he served as Managing Director, Danske
            Markets, the investment banking arm of the Danske Bank Group. In 2012, Normann (2012), echoing Lindbæk’s
            2010 comments, said, ‘Commercial banks cannot maintain long-term funding… Therefore, organisations such as
            NIB are crucial to complete some of the region’s big communication, infrastructure, and pollution-fighting
            projects.’</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and NIB Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Since commencing lending operations, NIB has financed over 2,200 investment projects inside and outside its
        membership area, with most approvals being to the Nordic-Baltic region. While it lends outside its membership,
        approvals are in relatively small amounts. Non-member projects are required to be of mutual interest to member
        and non-member countries. In 2018, non-member states received just 5% of annual approvals, some €200 million.
        To build its non-member lending portfolio, NIB has established cooperation agreements with the
        <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>, <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, and <abbr>CAF</abbr> and with countries in Africa, Asia, Eurasia, Latin
        America, and the Middle East. Notably, in comparison to the ‘flexible’ and ‘rapid’ project approval process of
        the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, the NIB opts for more rigorous and lengthy processes: ‘NIB considers its
        thorough credit and mandate reviewing processes as adding a quality stamp to our customers’ project’ (Normann
        2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Over the past two decades, annual loan approvals doubled from €2.1 billion in 1997 to €4.3 billion in 2018. It
        offers long-term loans and guarantees on competitive market terms to the public and private sectors and normal
        total project costs are €20 million and above, with NIB financing generally not exceeding 50% of total project
        costs (Normann 2019). Illustrating again that it regards itself more as an investment bank than a development
        bank, Normann (2019) says that the ‘NIB does not offer development finance as such, but provides long-term
        loans and guarantees… to projects contributing to our mandate, based on sound banking principles.’ In 2018,
        NIB’s sectoral approvals were industries and services (31%), infrastructure, transportation, and
        telecommunications (27%), energy and environment (22%), and financial institutions and SMEs (20%); such
        sectoral approvals denote its investment project portfolio.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The NIB has an explicit environmental mandate, translated into climate project financing and green bond
        issuances. Between 2011 and 2018, the Nordic MDB issued €3.5 billion in environmental bonds, and the Nordic
        share of cumulative green bond issuances between 2007 and 2018 was an estimated 7%, meaning the Nordic
        countries are at the forefront of this area of climate action. Further, all loans are assessed on their
        environmental benefits – ranging from pollution prevention to <a class="item2"></a>climate change mitigation
        and adaptation – and, in 2018, NIB updated its Environmental Bond Framework ‘to more widely finance investments
        that benefit the environment’ (Normann 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like the World Bank Group and IsDB Group, the NIB is part of the Nordic Finance Group made up of four
        international financial institutions (IFIs) headquartered in Finland: the NIB, NDF, NEFCO, and Nopef. While
        relatively small, the Nordic Finance Group reveals a complex network of complementary financing arrangements
        oriented to the approval and disbursal of climate finance. Nopef was the first part of the group formed in
        1982. Today, it is managed by NEFCO and offers financing to Nordic private sector SMEs to prepare (notably
        green) investments outside the EU area; it approved some 3,000 projects totalling €104 million between 1982 and
        2018. Compared to other MDBs, the Nordic Finance Group <a class="item2"></a>IFIs were early adopters of climate
        and environmental action, with rhetoric supported by their loan portfolios and mainstreaming initiatives.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The NDF was established in 1988 and began operations in 1989 originally as a concessional lending window for
        social and economic development in developing countries globally. After acting as a minor MDB for its first
        fifteen years, the Nordic Development Cooperation Ministers in 2005 recommended disbanding it after the member
        countries, notably Denmark, failed to agree on a fifth capital replenishment and suspended financing. In 2009,
        following a review supported by Finland and the Nordic Council endorsing that the NDF continue its activities,
        the member countries approved a new mandate, to shift from soft loans for <a class="item2"></a>social and
        economic development to grants for climate change interventions in low- income countries (Amland 2018, Normann
        2019). Its head office is in the NIB’s Helsinki headquarters, with the Nordic fund acquiring services at
        self-cost price from NIB – office premises, administration, ICT services, and accounting – while remaining
        legally independent. The NIB has an appointed observer on the NDF’s Board of Directors. Thus, it seems to
        operate a bit more separately than the IDA does from the IBRD.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The Nordic <a class="item2"></a>fund’s capital stock has increased steadily since commencing operations: 1991
        €4 million; 1994 €60 million; 2000 €360 million; and 2008 €691 million. As of 2015, its subscribed capital was
        €1 billion, with capital drawn from the development cooperation budgets of the five Nordic member countries:
        Sweden (37%), Denmark (23%), Norway (21%), Finland (18%), and Iceland (1%). Yet, as Amland (2018) highlights,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          If the Nordic donors do not inject more capital, the fund’s resources will slowly be depleted… Several
          sources confirm that there is disagreement about the way forward among Nordic donors. Denmark remains opposed
          to new replenishments, Norway and Sweden have a wait-and-see approach while Finland and Iceland favour an
          expansion of NDF. Since Nordic donors cannot agree upon a joint replenishment of NDF, voluntary donor
          contributions have been raised as an alternative way of providing more resources to NDF.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Wihtol (2013) argues that the niche fund should be strengthened due to its strong track record as nimble,
        respected, and efficient. It has a client-friendly reputation that focusses on co-financing, promotion of
        ‘progressive’ Nordic values such as equality, and on the most vulnerable. Its innovative project portfolio has
        been emulated in Latin America.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Since adopting its new mandate in 2009, the NDF has been led by three <a class="item2"></a>Managing Directors:
        Helge Semb, Pasi Hellman, and Karin Isaksson, whose history demonstrates links to MDBs and development players.
        Iterating its relevance as a niche MDB, Hellman said that the Nordic fund
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          has its own narrow pigeonhole in the field of climate finance… One of our greatest strengths is the fact that
          we are a small and agile fund. We can even focus on small and micro-enterprise projects for which the World
          Bank, for instance, is too big.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (cited in Toivanen ND)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Between 1989 and 2008, the <a class="item2"></a>Nordic fund approved 188 concessional credits valued at €940
        million, with sectoral priorities being infrastructure, education, agriculture, and environment. Since 2009,
        annual climate intervention grants have been few and small in cost: an average of 12 projects totalling €40
        million annually. In 2018, it approved nine projects totalling €47.2 million (48% to Africa, 22% to Latin
        America, 20% to Asia, and 10% to multiple regions) (NDF 2018). It regularly co-finances projects with other
        MDBs and the Nordic bilateral development organisations. The NDF also finances and manages the Nordic Climate
        Facility (NCF), which targets private and public partnerships between Nordic and NDF-partner organisations with
        the aim of building innovative climate change projects. Twenty-one countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America
        are eligible for NCF financing.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In 1989, concurrent to the NDF commencing operations, NIB formed NEFCO as a special unit. NEFCO and NIB became
        <a class="item2"></a>independent organisations in 1993, with NEFCO mandated to facilitate investments in green
        growth and climate change action. It ‘focuses on small and medium-sized projects with demonstrable value. The
        IFI also offers bankability through risk capital, grants, and environmental verification’ (Normann 2019). NEFCO
        in 2018 was the first Nordic institution to receive a Green Climate Fund (GCF) accreditation. In that same
        year, it approved 124 new projects for €64.6 million.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the NIB is like other specialised development banks in that it could be classified as a regional,
        sub-regional, or specialised bank. Its distinctly Nordic political and economic values as well as its weight on
        environmental and climate action, however, makes it a specialised bank, as does its role at the centre of the
        Nordic Finance Group. Similarly, the NDF is ‘an important addition to the Nordic toolbox’ (Wihtol 2013); it is
        small and its future depends upon Nordic capital replenishments but it is innovative and demonstrates that debt
        is not always the answer.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.7 <a class="item6"></a>OPEC Fund for International Development</h2>

      <div class="item">
        OFID was the fourth and final Arab-led MDB to emerge between 1968 and 1976. While not an Arab-only MDB, Saudi
        Arabia is the largest shareholder and Arab countries hold close to 65% of capital subscriptions (Tok, Calleja,
        and El-Ghaish 2014). Established in January 1976, it was proposed at the March 1975 Conference of the Sovereign
        and Heads of State of OPEC to channel aid to developing countries. It was an instrument to strengthen financial
        cooperation and solidarity between Global South oil-exporters and importers (Shushan and Marcoux 2011). As
        Ibrahim Shihata (1979, 31), OFID’s first Director General, commented, the
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          adjustment of the price of oil and the financial surplus it generated, coupled with the growing scarcity of
          this strategic commodity, have all given the oil producing countries of the South a new bargaining position,
          placing them, at least temporarily, in the vanguard of developing countries in their quest for a new world
          economic order.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Put simply, OFID arose from the 1973 <a class="item2"></a>oil price shock as both an expression of South-South
        solidarity and the growing geopolitical influence of oil-exporting emerging economies. While the global
        importance of OPEC foreign aid has declined in recent decades, ‘OPEC aid was a major player in international
        development,’ contributing ‘on average 13.5% of all aid between 1974 and 1994,’ and its aid was ‘heavily driven
        by geopolitics’ (Kragelund 2008, 565).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As per its Establishing Agreement, OFID provides concessional financing for balance of payments support and the
        implementation of development projects in non-OPEC developing countries as well as loans to international
        development agencies with developing countries as beneficiaries. OPEC countries are not eligible to receive
        OFID finance. OFID was originally called the OPEC <a class="item2"></a>Special Fund and had a different charter
        but its mandate was similar, especially the strengthening of financial cooperation between OPEC members and
        other developing countries by providing concessional finance (Shihata 1976). The major distinction between the
        Special Fund and OFID concerns their organisational autonomy and formalised status. The Special Fund was ‘a
        collective aid facility of OPEC member countries, in the form of an international account jointly owned by
        these countries and jointly administered by a “Governing Committee” of which they were all members’ (Shihata
        1980, 879). In other words, the Fund was a temporary ‘clearinghouse for aid that oil-producing states were
        well-placed to give as a result of sharply increased revenues from oil exports’ (Shushan and Marcoux 2011,
        1970). OFID, however, is an MDB. The Special Fund commenced operations in August 1976 with an initial endowment
        of $800 million. Saudi Arabia and Iran contributed 25% each of the initial capital contribution and Venezuela,
        the third largest contributor, contributed 14% (Zamora 1980). Following a revision of its charter in May 1980,
        the Special Fund became OFID, transitioning from a short-term facility ‘into a multilateral agency with its own
        legal personality’ (Porter 1986, 53) in another demonstration of the staying power of international
        organisations.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are now twelve OFID member countries. Saudi Arabia is the largest shareholder with over 33% of shares,
        mirroring its position in the <abbr>AFESD</abbr>, <abbr>BADEA</abbr>, and IsDB. Venezuela is the second largest
        shareholder with 15% and Kuwait, Nigeria, and Iran round out the five major shareholders, with these five
        countries controlling over 76% of shares (Tok, Calleja, and El-Ghaish 2014, Zimmermann and Smith 2011). The
        other <a class="item2"></a>member countries are Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iraq, Libya, and the UAE.
        Ecuador reactivated its membership in June 2014 after a 22-year absence and Qatar terminated its membership in
        July 2019. By December 2016, member pledged capital contributions totalled $4.4 billion of which $3.5 billion
        were direct contributions.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As <a class="item2">Table 8.6</a> details, the OFID has been led by four <a class="item2"></a>Director Generals
        since 1976, who have been from Egypt, Nigeria, and Saudi Arabia.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"></a><a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 8.6</em> OPEC Fund for International Development Director
          Generals</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">Director-General</th>

            <th class="item11">Nationality</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Ibrahim F.I. Shihata</td>

            <td class="item12">Egyptian</td>

            <td class="item12">1976–83</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw the establishment of the OPEC Special Fund and its 1980 restructuring into OFID.
            While at OFID, he served as an IFAD Executive Director. An expert on international development, Shihata
            later served as the World Bank General Counsel from 1983 to 1998, the first person from a developing
            country to be appointed to the position. Shihata (1981, 251), reflecting on OPEC’s members, said, ‘Although
            depicted in the media as the “new rich” countries, all of them are at an early stage of development if
            judged by the relevant social and economic indicators and not by false appearances of wealth. As in the
            rest of the developing world, the success of their development efforts is to a great extent dependent on
            the goodwill of the industrialised countries. They are all food-deficit countries, with some depending
            almost entirely on food imports. Not one of them has a powerful industrial base. With the possible
            exception of Indonesia, none of them has major exports other than oil. At least five of them are debtors in
            the international financial market… These facts make the study of the impressive external aid record of
            OPEC countries of particular interest, where the lessons to be drawn may differ sharply from those
            reflected in current opinion.’</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Director-General</td>

            <td class="item12">Nationality</td>

            <td class="item12">Tenure</td>

            <td class="item12">Details</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Y. Seyyid Abdulai</td>

            <td class="item12">Nigerian</td>

            <td class="item12">Aug 1983–Oct 2003</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw a two-decade expansion of OFID into a significant MDB, building its staff,
            capital base, and borrower country engagement. At the UNESCO General Conference in Paris, France, on 8
            November 1983, Abdulai (1990, 9) noted, ‘Of immediate significance to us is the drastic reduction in
            economic assistance of the developed countries to the Third World. This has steadily taken place on grounds
            that one should not send resources outside when one has not been able to do everything at home. The fallacy
            of this thinking is becoming increasingly clear. The world cannot be divided into outside and inside.
            Global interdependence makes nonsense of such a classification.’</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Suleiman Jasir Al-Herbish</td>

            <td class="item12">Saudi</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 2003–Oct 2018</td>

            <td class="item12">Oversaw an institutional rebranding of OFID including a new vision focused on
            sustainable development and poverty alleviation and a mission to foster South-South partnerships. He
            pursued a campaign to eradicate energy poverty, labelling energy poverty as the ‘missing ninth’ MDG; access
            to energy became the seventh SDG. Prior to his appointment at OFID, Al-Herbish served for thirteen years as
            the Governor of Saudi Arabia at OPEC.</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Abdulhamid Alkhalifa</td>

            <td class="item12">Saudi</td>

            <td class="item12">Nov 2018–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Prior to his appointment, he served as Deputy Secretary General of the Saudi Arabian
            Public Investment Fund and held leadership positions at the World Bank Group.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and OFID Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As of December 2018, cumulative OFID lending included $14.5 billion in public sector lending, $3.8 billion in
        Trade Finance Facility lending, $3.4 billion in Private Sector Facility lending, and $1.7 billion for IFAD, IMF
        Trust Fund, and grant assistance. Over the past two decades, new annual approvals increased considerably, from
        $284 million in 2000 to $1.5 billion in 2018. OFID’s Trade Financial Facility, established in 2006 to provide
        trade finance to public and private enterprises, shaped this increase in annual approvals (Rouis et al. 2010).
        Of the $284 million in new approvals in 2000, $257 million was public sector lending. In contrast, of the $1.5
        billion approved in 2018, $732 million was public sector lending while close to $540 million was trade finance
        (OFID 2018). Its priority sectors are energy, transportation, finance, agriculture, water and sanitation,
        telecommunications, health, industry, and education, mostly delivered as project investments (Ramady and Mahdi
        2015).
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.8 <a class="item6"></a>International Fund for Agricultural Development</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The IFAD is a specialised agency of the United Nations founded in 1977. Its mandate is to ‘mobilise additional
        resources to be made available on concessional terms for agricultural development in developing Member States’
        (IFAD 2019). Of the MDBs outlined in this chapter, IFAD is arguably the most specialised, with its projects and
        programmes aimed at expanding rural food production and improving the nutrition of the poor (King 1985). As
        Tasie (2013, 187) notes, unlike other IFIs,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          which have a broad range of objectives, the Fund has a very specific mandate to combat hunger and rural
          poverty in developing countries… [It] is generally accepted that the Fund has a distinct and catalytic role
          in improving the livelihood of both subsistence and market-oriented small-holder farmers and producers.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        IFAD began operations in 1978 with $1.05 billion and led 60 country surveys in 1979 to build its initial
        project pipeline.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The origins of IFAD date back to the early 1970s and the sub-Sahelian food crisis (Wihtol 2014). <a class="item2"></a>Global food insecurity and a sudden decline in agricultural investment created extreme food
        shortages in developing countries, aggravated by the 1973 oil shock, which drastically curtailed agricultural
        production. In response, the UN General Assembly convened the November 1974 World Food Conference that, among
        other achievements, endorsed Resolution XIII to establish IFAD, addressing a gap in MDF other MDBs were not
        adequately closing (Kamau and Colaiacomo 2012, King 1985, Talbot 1980). While there ‘was little open opposition
        to the fund proposal,’ with the US and Soviet Union publicly supporting it, the US opposed it behind the
        scenes, perceived IFAD as challenging the World Bank’s role in agriculture. It changed its position after ‘it
        became reasonably clear that OPEC would give substantial financial support to the fund’ (Talbot 1980, 263–4).
        Indeed, Szasz (1999) reports there was a challenge between OECD <abbr>DAC</abbr> donors and OPEC states in 1974
        to each put up around $600m for agricultural development in developing states and it was the desire of Arab
        states for a new institution where they would have more influence that was decisive in IFAD’s establishment.
        Kamau and Colaiacomo (2012, 473) equally contend that, while there was a financing gap, IFAD ‘was more of a
        political consideration than a functional one,’ with OPEC ‘preferring the establishment of an independent
        organization which they could control by exercising their swing vote.’ Like the Arab-led MDBs, OPEC’s support
        for IFAD was also in part to restore its reputation in oil-importing developing countries following the 1973
        oil shock. The OFID directed $861 million from OPEC to the IFAD’s initial capital and first replenishment
        round.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are 177 IFAD shareholders. <a class="item2"></a>Membership is open to all UN member countries and
        shareholders are divided into List A (primarily OECD members), List B (primarily OPEC states), and List C
        (developing countries). List C is sub-divided into C1 (Africa), C2 (Europe, Asia, and the Pacific), and C3
        (Latin America and the Caribbean). List A members hold 49% of shares, List B 11%, and List C 39%. Each IFAD
        shareholder is represented on the Governing Council, with representation made up of Original Votes and
        Replenishment Votes. Below the Governing Council, the Executive Board has 18 representatives elected from
        member countries.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        IFAD’s ten largest shareholders are the US (6.99%), Japan (4.18%), Germany (4.24%), the UK (3.12%), Italy
        (3.74%), the Netherlands (3.88%), Sweden (4.07%), France (3.1%), Canada (3.47%), and Saudi Arabia (3.14%).
        Collectively, they control almost 40% of shareholdings and they are some of the biggest providers of
        agricultural subsidies, which distort global food markets. Further, like the World Bank, those countries which
        benefit most from IFAD interventions are the smallest <a class="item2"></a>shareholders, with the majority
        holding less than 0.25% each. Like the IDA and other concessional financiers, but rare among stand-alone MDBs,
        IFAD relies on capital replenishments drawn from member states, which gives large donor countries strong
        influence over IFAD’s operational priorities and budgets.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IFAD is led by a President, who serves as Chairperson of the Executive Board. Since 1977, six Presidents
        have led the MDB and as they have come from a diverse range of countries: Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Kuwait,
        Sweden, Nigeria, and Togo. The incumbent President is Gilbert Houngbo, who took office in April 2017.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1978 and 2016, IFAD approved over one thousand <a class="item2"></a>loans and debt-relief grants
        totalling $17.1 billion and over 2,700 grants totalling $1.1 billion (IFAD 2016). It mobilised $10.4 billion in
        co-financing, with its largest multilateral co-financing partners being OFID (21.2%), <abbr>AfDB</abbr>
        (17.7%), IBRD (8.1%), and <abbr>AFESD</abbr> (7.4%) (IFAD 2017). Given that the Arab-led MDBs were central to
        establishing IFAD, it is relevant that two of its largest co-financiers are OFID and <abbr>AFESD</abbr>. IFAD’s
        main work areas include climate and environment, crops, fisheries and aquaculture, gender, indigenous people,
        land, livestock and rangeland, market access, nutrition, farmer organisations, rural finance, water, and youth.
        These priority areas iterate the IFAD’s specialised focus on rural poverty alleviation and smallholder
        agricultural development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like many MDBs, IFAD has an independent evaluations office reviewing project performance. In 2002, the office
        published its first Annual Report on Results and Impact of IFAD Operations. This revealed that between 2002 and
        2016, IFAD’s <a class="item2"></a>project performance in agricultural and rural development was comparable to
        the World Bank but significantly better than the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> (70% moderately satisfactory or better
        compared to 48%) and <abbr>AsDB</abbr> (86% compared to 62%) (IFAD IEO 2018).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, IFAD is a small organisation with an annual lending capacity a quarter the size of the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>., Yet, it plays a significant, specialised role in the agricultural and rural sectors, with a
        project portfolio that is far more pro-poor than the large MDBs.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.9 <a class="item6"></a>New Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <a class="item2"></a><em class="calibre4">Agreement on the New Development Bank</em> was signed in July 2014 by Brazil,
        Russia, India, China, and South Africa at the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>BRICS</abbr> Fortaleza Summit. The
        Agreement entered into force in July 2015 and the NDB commenced operations the same month. An NDB-like
        organisation was first proposed by Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh after the 2008 GFC, as an alternative
        to the Global North-led MDBs. Nicholas Stern and Joseph Stiglitz – both former World Bank chief economists –
        played a role in its development, presenting on it when it was circulated in 2011 among <abbr>BRICS</abbr>
        countries. Stern claimed at a 2013 conference in London that their ideas were as much about ensuring
        <abbr>BRICS</abbr> governments were tied-up in partnerships with big business in order to guarantee their
        contractual reliability as it was to increase focus on <a class="item2"></a>sustainability and climate finance
        (see Bond 2020). The <a class="item2"></a>March 2012 Delhi Summit discussed the feasibility of forming a
        <a class="item2"></a><abbr>BRICS</abbr>-led MDB, a discussion that led to the formal agreement to establish the
        NDB at the <a class="item2"></a>March 2013 Durban Summit. The Durban Summit Declaration (<abbr>BRICS</abbr>
        2013) argued that the
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          prevailing global governance architecture is regulated by institutions which were conceived in circumstances
          when the international landscape in all its aspects was characterised by very different challenges and
          opportunities… We aim at progressively developing <abbr>BRICS</abbr> into a full-fledged mechanism of current
          and long-term coordination on a wide range of key issues on the world economy and politics.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        China was initially sceptical of the utility of the proposed MDB, but agreed to it after ‘India’s proposal
        received support from all the other members’ (Wang 2019, 224).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        NDB’s (2015) <a class="item2"></a>mission is to ‘mobilise resources for infrastructure and sustainable
        development projects in <abbr>BRICS</abbr> and other emerging economies and developing countries, complementing
        the existing efforts of multilateral and regional financial institutions for global growth and development.’ It
        earns its title as a specialised bank due to its focus on infrastructure and sustainable development as well as
        being currently limited to financing projects in <abbr>BRICS</abbr> countries; there appears to be little
        interest from other states to receive NDB project financing (Wang 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The formal rationale for the NDB is like the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, that emerging economies and developing
        countries need infrastructure investment, MDBs can finance long-term projects that private investors tend to
        avoid, and are able to offer technical and advisory support (Lingxiao, Yao, and Zexian 2015, Wang 2017).
        Infrastructure projects have always been the bread-and-butter of the MDBs, as discussed in <a class="item2">Chapter 9</a>, though they are often difficult terrain too. Qobo and Soko (2015, 279) link the neglect
        in <a class="item2"></a>infrastructure investments in emerging markets and developing countries to, narrowly,
        signs of market failure and, more broadly, historical neglect and power imbalances in the global economic
        system.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Beyond the formal rationale, however, the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>-led MDB serves other purposes. One important
        catalyst, as Stuenkel (2015, 108) outlines, is that the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> ‘have large foreign exchange
        reserves and the question is whether these reserves can be beneficially pooled so that more of the savings can
        be invested rather than hoarded.’ Thus, the NDB, particularly for China, is a means of circulating excess
        capital and transforming that capital into political currency. Further, Chin (2014, 370) outlines at length the
        respective national interests motivating the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> to form NDB:
      </div>

      <ul class="list-bullet">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            Brazil: a source of finance for infrastructure development needs and a tool to raise the profile of
            Brazil’s National Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            Russia: a means to encourage intra-<abbr>BRICS</abbr> trade and investment and a geostrategic tool to
            connect with the Global South.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            India: a source of finance for infrastructure, given its ineligibility to receive aid from certain donors,
            including the IDA.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            China: a means of opening new avenues for its construction companies and stimulating job creation, as well
            as a vehicle for its global leadership, particularly in the context of its stewardship of the
            <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="list1">
            South Africa: a source of development finance for Africa and a tool for South African leadership in its
            region.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ul>

      <div class="item">
        The NDB is thus both an expression of <abbr>BRICS</abbr> formalisation and a political instrument, particularly
        in the context of their limited voice in other MDBs (Reisen 2015, 302, Wang 2017, 4).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The five <abbr>BRICS</abbr> countries are currently the only members of the MDB. They hold an equal number of
        shares and voting rights and no one member has veto power, a significant departure from the World Bank’s
        structure. Each NDB shareholder is currently allocated 100,000 shares, with a further 500,000 shares
        unallocated. Authorised capital is $100 billion but subscribed capital is a modest $50 billion, with each of
        the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> contributing $10 billion, only 20% of which is paid in. Non-<abbr>BRICS</abbr> countries
        are eligible to join the NDB, although to date none have. The <abbr>AIIB</abbr> had 37 members in its first
        year of operations, but the NDB is yet to expand. If new states join, the Establishing Agreement prevents the
        voting power of the founding <abbr>BRICS</abbr> to drop below 55% of total voting power (NDB 2015), meaning
        they would always hold a veto provided they acted in unison, which has not always been the case (Serrano Oswald
        2019). Indeed, political differences between members have increased. The prominence of the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>
        is further enshrined in the Establishing Agreement by the condition that the NDB <a class="item2"></a>President
        must be appointed on a rotational basis from one of the founding members.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        KV Kamath was the NDB’s first President and he contended at a UN South-South Roundtable in 2015 that
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          the NDB believes that we are amongst the first development lending institutions to be set up at the
          initiative of the South. We would also like to believe that the setting up of the NDB, in a way, is a coming
          of age of the countries of the South.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (Kamath 2015)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Although a misleading statement, given the number of MDBs owned and operated by Global South countries, it
        reveals that NDB is not only a financial institution but a political actor focussed on the global balance of
        power between the North and South. Further, examining NDB’s management team highlights the embeddedness of the
        financial status quo. Kamath served in the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>’s Private Sector Department and came from a career
        in the Indian private banking sector and Leslie Maasdorp, NDB Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, ‘was
        the main privatiser of South Africa’s state assets and also worked in the local leadership of Bank of America
        and Barclays’; the appointment of such individuals suggests a ‘re-legitimisation of world financial order’ as
        opposed to a rejection of it (Bond 2013, 615). Indeed, President Kamath, although championing the NDB as a
        Global South MDB, said that ‘Our objective is not to challenge the existing system as it is but to improve and
        complement the system in our own way’ (cited in Tejas 2015). This result is not surprising given the structural
        implication of setting up the NDB as a traditional development bank.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        President Kamath was replaced in July 2020 by an appointee from right-wing populist Brazilian President
        <a class="item2"></a>Jair Bolsonaro: Marcos Troyjo. Bolsonaro, though nationalist and conservative, started
        espousing liberal economic policies during his 2018 presidential campaign, which is where Troyjo fits in. He
        was a Deputy Economy Minister and Special Secretary for Foreign Trade and International Affairs under Bolsonaro
        and represented the Brazilian Government on the boards of multilateral development institutions. Prior to that
        he had been a diplomat and an academic economist at Columbia University. Troyjo (2017) is a critic of
        deglobalisation and of neostructuralism in Latin America (discussed in <a class="item2">Chapter 4</a>) and a
        fan of free trade. Indeed, he said to have played a key role in the 2019 deal between the South American
        MERCOSUR trading bloc and the EU, which had been under negotiation for 20 years. It seems likely he will align
        the NDB in neoliberal directions, with a greater focus on infrastructure and less on the environment.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The NDB approved its first projects between April and June 2016, renewable and clean energy <a class="item2"></a>projects to Brazil, India, China, and South Africa, which was at least in part about virtue
        signalling with its first loans. However, a close examination reveals NDB investments involved questionable
        co-financing and execution through local intermediaries. Bond (2020) outlines how the loans to South African
        parastatals, including the power utility Eskom and to financial intermediaries, are very problematically caught
        up in South Africa’s unsustainable and crony-based regime of accumulation. Further, most of these loans were
        issued in US dollars not South African rand, as were the bulk of NDB loans in its first five years, increasing
        foreign currency exposure for borrowers. Corruption and procurement fraud are also major concerns in most of
        the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> and the NDB does not appear to have adequately addressed this, but the same is true of
        most MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The NDB has signed <a class="item2"></a>partnership agreements with several MDBs, including the
        <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, EBRD, EIB, and World Bank, as well as national
        development banks: Brazil’s <abbr>BNDES</abbr>, the China Development Bank, and Development Bank of Southern
        Africa. Between 2016 and May 2020, the NDB approved 55 projects worth $16.6 billion. In 2017, its lending
        portfolio grew to include projects to the transportation, water management, urban development, environmental
        efficiency, and social infrastructure sectors (NDB 2017). In addition, it established a <a class="item2"></a>Project Preparation Fund in January 2017, mirroring the older MDBs in demonstrating the need for
        adequate advisory and technical assistance to draft sound investments, which suggest too that an adequate
        project pipeline and project quality will be ongoing challenges. The NDB’s strong capitalisation and prudential
        rules resulted in S&amp;P’s awarding it an AA+ rating in 2018, which it has maintained since, again
        demonstrating it fits the standard MDB model.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, alongside the China-led <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>-led NDB is significant because it
        is the first specialised bank established in over two decades and the first new MDB in close to a decade. The
        creation of more MDBs either demonstrates the continued relevance of the model or the lack of imagination
        across the global community in development thinking. Either way, the NDB is not a rejection of the MDF status
        quo. As Reisen (2015, 297) argues, the NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, with their focus on infrastructure,
        ‘introduce choice for potential borrowers in terms of funding cost and modalities,’ but do not break with
        established norms.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">8.10 <a class="item6"></a>Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The idea for the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> came about in 2009 when the China Centre for International Economic Exchange
        considered the feasibility of a China-led MDB. Chinese President Xi Jinping publicly proposed the
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr> with President of the State Council Li Keqiang in October 2013 (Shelepov 2016, Wang 2019).
        With support gained from Southeast Asian countries through multilateral consultations, a memorandum of
        understanding on establishing the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> was signed in October 2014 between China and twenty Asian
        countries (Wang 2019). Following several negotiation rounds, its Articles of Agreement were signed by fifty
        countries on 29 June 2015 and entered into force on 25 December (Shelepov 2016). The <abbr>AIIB</abbr>
        officially commenced operations on 16 January 2016, approving its first projects on 24 June.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As per <abbr>AIIB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>Articles of Agreement, its purposes are to ‘foster sustainable
        economic development, create wealth and improve infrastructure connectivity in Asia by investing in
        infrastructure and other productive sectors’ and ‘promote regional cooperation and partnership’ in Asia and
        Oceania (<abbr>AIIB</abbr> 2015). Its functions include promoting public and private investment, financing
        development projects and programmes, and encouraging private co-financing. It is very similar to the NDB, with
        both being specialised banks investing in sustainable economic development and infrastructure (Humphrey 2015,
        Wang 2019, Wihtol 2014). The <abbr>AIIB</abbr> serves ‘China’s need to export its production overcapacity in
        order to arrest its domestic economic slowdown’ and is a response to China’s limited influence over major MDBs
        (Chan 2017, 569), after a decade or so of expanding its influence in a number of them.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>AIIB</abbr> has been interpreted as a financial arm of <a class="item2"></a>China’s <abbr>BRI</abbr>
        (Callaghan and Hubbard 2016, Chan 2017, Hameiri and Jones 2018), which is interlinked as part of ‘a grand
        economic and diplomatic strategy’ to ‘promote Chinese influence’ and minimise ‘the effects of Washington’s
        Asia-Pacific policy’ (Cai 2018, 841). President Xi proposed the Silk Road economic belt in September 2013 while
        touring Kazakhstan and the 21st-century maritime Silk Road in October 2013 while in Indonesia, matching the
        October 2013 proposal for the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> (Callaghan and Hubbard 2016, Chan 2017). Pairing an MDB with a
        strategic initiative is not new; many SRDBs and specialised banks were established as part of formal regional
        arrangements. While clearly a projection of China’s geostrategic influence, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> – just like
        NDB – is not a rejection of the MDF status quo, indeed it is very similar to the <abbr>AsDB</abbr> (Engel and
        Bazbauers 2018, Hameiri and Jones 2018). In fact, it has been said that one reason why <abbr>AIIB</abbr>
        conforms to established norms and standards – from governance structures to lending terms – is to legitimise by
        association the <abbr>BRI</abbr> (Callaghan and Hubbard 2016). Certainly, this has paid off for
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr> credit ratings; it received a AAA rating from S&amp;Ps and equivalents from Moody’s and Fitch
        in 2017 and has maintained that since.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As of mid-2020, there were 45 <a class="item2"></a>regional member countries and 37 non-regionals in the
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr>, as well as five prospective regional members and 15 prospective non-regionals. The 45
        regional members hold 76.35% of capital subscriptions and the 37 non-regionals hold 23.65%. China is the
        largest shareholder with 30.78%, followed by regional members India (8.65%) and Russia (6.76%). Germany
        (4.64%), France (3.49%), and the UK (3.16%) are the largest three non-regional members. This means that three
        of the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> countries hold the largest total capital subscriptions, with the other two – Brazil
        and South Africa – currently listed as prospective founding members. Thus, while <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is
        positioning itself as a broad multilateral body with a large membership, NDB’s shareholding is very small,
        suggesting that it is more focussed on reinforcing and localising the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> grouping whereas
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is more focussed on China-centric regional leadership (Cooper 2017, Grabel 2019, Wang 2019).
        Further, as Humphrey (2015, iv) argues, while
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          bringing in a mix of industrialised and developing countries will give the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> strong standing
          in the international arena as well as capital markets, it also means that it will face the same pressures as
          many existing major MDBs to impose stringent requirements on its operations.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Thus, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> could be more accountable and norm-conformist than the NDB. Further, key decisions
        require a 75% supermajority, meaning that China could be vetoed by groupings of member countries (Hameiri and
        Jones 2018, Serrano Oswald 2019). However, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> Board is not resident and has delegated a
        large degree of authority to management to approve loans (to the value of $300 million), which limits oversight
        and gives staff and management remarkable authority over the MDB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Headquartered in Beijing, the influence of China over the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is clear, particularly with the
        appointment of Jin Liqun as the MDB’s first and incumbent President. Jin was appointed by consensus at the
        sixth Meeting of Chief Negotiators held on 24 August 2015. A former Vice Minister of Finance in China, Jin
        served as a Vice President of <abbr>AsDB</abbr> (Gabusi 2017), further demonstrating that the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>
        is likely to conform to established MDB standards and is enmeshed in the MDB system. In a telling commentary by
        an anonymous high-level Chinese official, Serrano Oswald (2019, 208) records that
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is not doing something new or different. It is trying to fill the gap that the existing
          MDBs have failed to do so. The demand in infrastructure is huge but the existing MDBs are not able to fund.
          <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is taking the best parts from the MDBs and trying to make improvements on those
          shortcomings… The Operational Policy on Financing was drafted by experts from ADB, EIB, EBRD, WB.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        The US actively campaigned against the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>establishment, far more
        forcefully than it had in attempting to prevent the formation of many other MDBs, which is not surprising as
        the only other banks established by a hegemonic competitor – the USSR with the International Bank for Economic
        Cooperation (<a class="item2"></a>IBEC) and International Investment Bank (IIB) – were small and not
        organisations that the US could influence. The US claimed that the China-led MDB would ‘fail to meet
        environmental standards, procurement requirements, and other safeguards adopted by the World Bank’ (Reisen
        2015, 302). It also claimed that it was unnecessary given the work of the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>. It even went so
        far as to pressure its allies not to join (Chin and Gallagher 2019, 246), which ended up embarrassing the Obama
        administration as allies including Australia, Canada, France, Germany, and the UK became members. Former US
        Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers referred in April 2015 to the considerable number of countries joining the
        <abbr>AIIB</abbr> as ‘the moment the United States lost its role as the underwriter of the global economic
        system’ (cited in Wang 2019, 222). It appears that opposing the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> was less about norms and
        standards and more about the fact that China was leading it.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        By the end of 2018, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> had approved 35 projects. Fourteen projects were stand-alone financed
        by the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and 21 were co-financed. Only $7.5 billion was invested between 2016 and 2018 though
        the aim was $10 to $15 billion per annum; the slow start is not surprising as the history of MDBs demonstrates
        that project pipelines take time to develop. Indeed, it established a Project Preparation Special Fund in June
        2016 to support eligible members, particularly low-income countries, to prepare infrastructure projects through
        feasibility studies and advisory services. By the end of 2017, three countries had contributed $108 million to
        the Special Fund: China, South Korea, and the UK. The <abbr>AIIB</abbr>’s thematic priorities are sustainable
        infrastructure, cross-border connectivity, and private capital mobilisation. During its first two years, $716
        million in private capital was mobilised, reflecting the financialisation agenda and indicating the capitalist
        banking norms of the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, like so many other MDBs, the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> is not just a development bank but a political actor
        and an arm of a broader regional arrangement – in this case, the semi-formal <abbr>BRI</abbr> (Wang 2017, 4).
        As an MDB, however, the A<a class="item2"></a>IIB is not a counter-hegemonic challenge to established <a class="item2"></a>capitalist banking or MDF norms. In form, function, and purpose, it is quite indistinguishable from
        other specialised and regional banks and would be unlikely to receive the media and academic attention it
        currently does if it were not led by China (Chin 2016, Serrano Oswald 2018). The NDB and <abbr>AIIB</abbr> thus
        ‘herald a new era’ in terms of the geopolitical influence of the Global South ‘but also provide a valuable
        continuity with both the post-World War II era and the more recent past’ by reflecting long-standing MDB and
        MDF norms (Griffith-Jones in Humphrey et al. 2015, 8).
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">Bibliography</h2>

      <ol class="biblioentrylist">
        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Abdulai, Y. Seyyi. 1990. Development: The Unresolved Issues: Selected Statements by Y. Seyyid Abdulai,
            Director-General of the OPEC Fund for International Development. Vienna, Austria: OPEC Fund for
            International Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AFESD</abbr>. 1997. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 1997</em>. Safat, Kuwait: Arab Fund for Economic and Social
            Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>AIIB</abbr>. 2015. Articles of Agreement. Beijing: Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Amland, Bjørn H. 2018. “Nordic Donors to Discuss Strengthening Nordic Development Fund.” Development Today.
            <a href="http://www.development-today.com" class="item2">http://www.development-today.com/magazine/Frontpage/nordic_donors_to_discuss_strengthening_nordic_development_fund</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BADEA</abbr>. 2009. Agreement Establishing the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa.
            Khartoum: Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BADEA</abbr>. 2015. Seventh Five-Year Plan 2015–2019. Khartoum: Arab Bank for Economic Development in
            Africa.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BADEA</abbr>. 2018. Annual Report 2018. Khartoum: Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bengtsson, Rikard, Ole Elgstrom, and Jonas Tallberg. 2004. “Silencer or Amplifier? The European Union
            Presidency and the Nordic Countries.” <em class="calibre4">Scandinavian Political Studies</em> 27 (3):311–34.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bond, Patrick. 2013. “Sub-imperialism as Lubricant of Neoliberalism: South African ‘Deputy Sheriff’ Duty
            within Brics.” <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em> 34 (2):251–70. doi: 10.1080/01436597.2013.775783.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bond, Patrick. 2020. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> Banking and the Demise of Alternatives to the IMF and World Bank.”
            In <em class="calibre4">International Development Assistance and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr></em>, edited by Jose A. Puppim de
            Oliveira and Yijia Jing, 189–218. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>BRICS</abbr>. 2013. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> and Africa: Partnership for Development, Integration and
            Industrialisation.” 27 March. Accessed 3 April. <a href="http://brics5.co.za" class="item2">http://brics5.co.za/about-brics/summit-declaration/fifth-summit/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Bussière, Eric, and Emilie Willaert. 2006. <em class="calibre4">Council of Europe Development Bank: The Social Development
            Bank in Europe</em>. Paris: Council of Europe Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cai, Kevin G. 2018. “The One Belt One Road and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank: Beijing’s New
            Strategy of Geoeconomics and Geopolitics.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Contemporary China</em> 27 (114):831–47. doi:
            10.1080/10670564.2018.1488101.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Callaghan, Mike, and Paul Hubbard. 2016. “The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank: Multilateralism on the
            Silk Road.” <em class="calibre4">China Economic Journal</em> 9 (2):116–39. doi: 10.1080/17538963.2016.1162970.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cammack, Paul. 2018. “Situating the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in the Context of Global Economic
            Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies</em> 16 (3):241–58. doi:
            10.1080/14765284.2018.1476082.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CEB</abbr>. 2004. <em class="calibre4">Report of the Governor 2004</em>. Paris: Council of Europe Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CEB</abbr>. 2016a. <em class="calibre4">60 Years of European Solidarity</em>. Paris: Council of Europe Development
            Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CEB</abbr>. 2016b. <em class="calibre4">Development Plan 2017–2019</em>. Paris: Council of Europe Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CEB</abbr>. 2017. <em class="calibre4">Handbook for the Preparation and Implementation of Projects</em>. Paris:
            Council of Europe Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            <abbr>CEB</abbr>. 2019. “Articles of Agreement.” Paris: Council of Europe Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Chan, Lai-Ha. 2017. “Soft Balancing against the US ‘Pivot to Asia’: China’s Geostrategic Rationale for
            Establishing the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Australian Journal of International
            Affairs</em> 71 (6):568–90. doi: 10.1080/10357718.2017.1357679.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Chen, Lurong, and Philippe De Lombaerde. 2014. “Testing the Relationships between Globalization,
            Regionalization and the Regional Hubness of the BRICs.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Policy Modeling</em> 36
            (S1):S111–31.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Chin, Gregory. 2014. “The <abbr>BRICS</abbr>-Led Development Bank: Purpose and Politics Beyond the G20.”
            <em class="calibre4">Global Policy</em> 5 (3):366–73.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Chin, Gregory. 2016. “Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank: Governance Innovation and Prospects.”
            <em class="calibre4">Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations</em> 22 (1):11. doi:
            10.1163/19426720-02201002.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Chin, Gregory, and Kevin Gallagher. 2019. “Coordinated Credit Spaces: The Globalization of Chinese
            Development Finance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):245–74. doi: 10.1111/dech.12470.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Clement, Keith. 2004. “Structural Fund Programmes as Instruments for Sustainable Regional Development a
            Review of Nordic Effectiveness.” <em class="calibre4">Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research</em> 17
            (1):43–60. doi: 10.1080/1351161042000190736.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Cooper, Andrew F. 2017. “The <abbr>BRICS</abbr>’ New Development Bank: Shifting from Material Leverage to
            Innovative Capacity.” <em class="calibre4">Global Policy</em> 8 (3):275–84. doi: 10.1111/ 1758-5899.12458.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Corm, Georges. 2006. “The Arab Experience.” In <em class="calibre4">Regional Financial Cooperation</em>, edited by José
            Antonio Ocampa, 291–328. Washington, DC: UN ECLA and Brookings Institution Press.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Czarny, Ryszard M. 2017. <em class="calibre4">A Modern Nordic Saga: Politics, Economy and Society</em>. Cham: Springer
            International Publishing.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Danielson, Anders, and Lennart Wohlgemuth. 2003. Swedish Development Cooperation in Perspective. Lund: Lund
            University, Department of Economics.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Dennis, Bengt. 2015. “Green Light at Third Attempt: How NIB Came to be Forty Years Ago.” Nordic Investment
            Bank. <a href="https://www.nib.int" class="item2">https://www.nib.int/who_we_are/news_and_media/articles/1761/green_light_at_third_attempt_how_nib_came_to_be_forty_years_ago</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Duggan, Niall. 2015. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> and the Evolution of a New Agenda within Global Governance.” In
            <em class="calibre4">The European Union and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: Complex Relations in the Era of Global Governance</em>,
            edited by Marek Rewizorski, 11–25. New York: Springer.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            El Mallakh, Ragaei, and Mihssen Kadhim. 1976. “Arab Instititionalised Development Aid: An Evaluation.”
            <em class="calibre4">Middle East Journal</em> 30 (4):471–84.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Elgström, Ole, and Sarah Delputte. 2016. “An End to Nordic Exceptionalism? Europeanisation and Nordic
            Development Policies.” <em class="calibre4">European Politics and Society</em> 17 (1):28–41. doi:
            10.1080/23745118.2015.1075765.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engel, Susan, and Adrian Bazbauers. 2018. “Old and New Development Banks and the Future of Development
            Finance.” FLASCO-ISA Joint International Conference, Quito, Ecuador.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engen, Lars, and Annalisa Prizzon. 2018. A Guide to the Multilateral Development Banks. London: Overseas
            Development Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Engh, Sunniva, and Helge Pharo. 2009. “Nordic Cooperation in Providing Development Aid.” In <em class="calibre4">Regional
            Cooperation and International Organizations: The Nordic Model in Transnational Alignment</em>, edited by
            Norbert Götz and Heidi Haggrén, 113–30. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Forsberg, Tuomas. 2013. “The Rise of Nordic Defence Cooperation: A Return to Regionalism?”
            <em class="calibre4">International Affairs</em> 89 (5):1161–81. doi: 10.1111/1468-2346.12065.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Fritz, Barbara, and Laurissa Mühlich. 2019. “Regional Financial Arrangements in the Global Financial Safety
            Net: The Arab Monetary Fund and the Eurasian Fund for Stabilization and Development.” <em class="calibre4">Development and
            Change</em> 50 (1):96–121. doi: 10.1111/dech.12466.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gabusi, Giuseppe. 2017. ““Crossing the River by Feeling the Gold”: The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
            and the Financial Support to the Belt and Road Initiative.” <em class="calibre4">China &amp; World Economy</em> 25
            (5):23–45. doi: 10.1111/cwe.12212.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Grabel, Ilene. 2019. “Continuity, Discontinuity and Incoherence in the Bretton Woods Order: A Hirschmanian
            Reading.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):46–71. doi: 10.1111/dech.12469.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Gu, Jing, Richard Carey, Alex Shankland, and Anuradha Chenoy. 2016. “Introduction: International
            Development, South-South Cooperation and the Rising Powers.” In <em class="calibre4">The <abbr>BRICS</abbr> in International
            Development</em>, edited by Jing Gu, Alex Shankland and Anuradha Chenoy, 1–24. New York: Palgrave
            Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hameiri, Shahar, and Lee Jones. 2018. “China Challenges Global Governance? Chinese International
            Development Finance and the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>.” <em class="calibre4">International Affairs</em> 94 (3):573–93. doi:
            10.1093/ia/iiy026.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Harmer, Andrew, and Kent Buse. 2014. “The <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: A Paradigm Shift in Global Health?”
            <em class="calibre4">Contemporary Politics</em> 20 (2):127–45.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hellén, Siv, and Barbro Eriksson. 2011. “NIB 35 Years: Building Nordic Economic Cooperation.” Nordic
            Investment Bank. <a href="https://www.nib.int" class="item2">https://www.nib.int/who_we_are/news_and_media/articles/1165/nib_35_years_building_nordic_economic_cooperation</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Hernandez, Diego, and Krishna Chaitanya Vadlamannati. 2017. “Politics of Religiously Motivated Lending: An
            Empirical Analysis of Aid Allocation by the Islamic Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Comparative
            Economics</em> 45 (4):910–29. doi: 10.1016/j.jce.2016.09.008.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2015. Developmental Revolution or Bretton Woods Revisited? The Prospects of the
            <abbr>BRICS</abbr> New Development Bank and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. London: Overseas
            Development Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris. 2019. “‘Minilateral’ Development Banks: What the Rise of Africa’s Trade and Development
            Bank Says about Multilateral Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):164–90. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12467.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Humphrey, Chris, Stephany Griffith-Jones, Richard Carey, and Annalisa Prizzon. 2015. Multilateral
            Development Banks in the 21st century. Three Perspectives on China and the Asian Infrastructure Investment
            Bank. London: Overseas Development Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IFAD. 2016. Annual Report 2016. Rome, Italy: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IFAD. 2017. Annual Report 2017. Rome, Italy: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IFAD. 2019. Agreement Establishing the International Fund for Agricultural Development. Rome: International
            Fund for Agricultural Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IFAD IEO. 2018. 2018 Annual Report on Results and Impact of IFAD Operations. Rome, Italy: IFAD Independent
            Evaluation Office.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            International Banker. 2017. “Interview with Dr. Rolf Wenzel, Governor of the Council of Europe Development
            Bank.” Accessed 4 September 2019. <a href="https://internationalbanker.com" class="item2">https://internationalbanker.com/finance/interview-dr-rolf-wenzel-governor-council-europe-development-bank/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IsDB. 2018. <em class="calibre4">Annual Report 2018</em>. Jeddah: Islamic Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IsDB. 2019. Articles of Agreement. Jeddah: Islamic Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            IsDB. 2020. Annual Report 2019. Jeddah: Islamic Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Johnson, Willard R. 1983. “The Role of the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa.” <em class="calibre4">The Journal
            of Modern African Studies</em> 21 (4):625–44. doi: 10.1017/S0022278X00024241.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kalathil, Shanthi. 2018. “China in Xi’s “New Era”: Redefining Development.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Democracy</em>
            29 (2):52–58. doi: doi:10.1353/jod.2018.0024.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kamath, K.V. 2015. “United Nations South-South Roundtable, New York.” New Development Bank. Accessed 4
            April. <a href="http://www.ndb.int" class="item2">http://www.ndb.int/president_desk/united-nations-south-south-round-table-new-york/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kamau, Faith, and Marieclaire Colaiacomo. 2012. “Financing for Development: Examining the Concept of
            Resource Mobilization for International Organizations, a Case Study of the International Fund for
            Agricultural Development (IFAD).” <em class="calibre4">International Organizations Law Review</em> 9:467–96. doi:
            10.1163/15723747-00902008.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kellerman, Miles. 2019. “The Proliferation of Multilateral Development Banks.” <em class="calibre4">The Review of
            International Organizations</em> 14 (1):107–45. doi: 10.1007/s11558-018-9302-y.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            King, John Andrews. 1985. “The International Fund for Agricultural Development: The First Six Years.”
            <em class="calibre4">Development Policy Review</em> 3 (1):3–20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7679.1985.tb00357.x.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kragelund, Peter. 2008. “The Return of Non-<abbr>DAC</abbr> Donors to Africa: New Prospects for African
            Development?” <em class="calibre4">Development Policy Review</em> 26 (5):555–84. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7679.2008.00423.x.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Kuhn, W. E. 1982. “The Islamic Development Bank: Performance and Prospects.” <em class="calibre4">Nebraska Journal of
            Economics and Business</em> 21 (3):49–63.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lessambo, Felix I. 2015. <em class="calibre4">International Financial Institutions and Their Challenges: A Global Guide for
            Future Methods</em>. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Lingxiao, Tang, Ouyang Yao, and Huang Zexian. 2015. “The Foundation for the Establishment of the
            <abbr>BRICS</abbr> New Development Bank: Immediate Impetus and Theoretical Rationale.” <em class="calibre4">Social Sciences
            in China</em> 36 (4):40–56. doi: 10.1080/02529203.2015.1088622.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Momani, Bessma, and Crystal A. Ennis. 2012. “Between Caution and Controversy: Lessons from the Gulf Arab
            States as (Re-)emerging Donors.” <em class="calibre4">Cambridge Review of International Affairs</em> 25 (4):605–27. doi:
            10.1080/09557571.2012.734786.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Naim, Moises. 2007. “Rogue Aid.” Foreign Policy. <a href="http://www.foreignpolicy.com" class="item2">http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2007/02/14/rogue_aid</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Nayyar, Deepak. 2016. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr>, Developing Countries, and Global Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Third World
            Quarterly</em> 37 (4):575–91.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            NDB. 2015. Agreement on the New Development Bank. Shanghai: New Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            NDB. 2017. Annual Report 2017. Shanghai, China: New Development Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            NDF. 2018. Annual Report 2018. Helsinki, Finland: Nordic Development Fund.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Neumayer, Eric. 2003. “What Factors Determine the Allocation of Aid by Arab Countries and Multilateral
            Agencies?” <em class="calibre4">The Journal of Development Studies</em> 39 (4):134–47. doi: 10.1080/713869429.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            NIB. 2016. “NIB 40: Financing the Future Seminar.” <a href="http://annualreport.nib.int" class="item2">http://annualreport.nib.int/2016/in-detail/40th-anniversary/nib-40-financing-the-future-seminar/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Normann, Henrik. 2012. “In profile: Henrik Normann, Nordic Investment Bank.” emefinance <a href="https://www.emeafinance.com" class="item2">https://www.emeafinance.com/live/deals-top/debt-capital-markets/2191-in-profile-henrik-normann-nordic-investment-bank-1442</a>
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Normann, Henrik. 2019. Nordic Investment Bank – Henrik Normann – Answers to UNSW Survey 15.5.2019, edited
            by Adrian Robert Bazbauers: UNSW Canberra.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            OFID. 2018. Annual Report 2018. Vienna, Austria: OPEC Fund for International Development.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ørvik, Nils. 1974. “Nordic Cooperation and High Politics.” <em class="calibre4">International Organization</em> 28
            (1):61–88. doi: 10.1017/S0020818300004367.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Paaskesen, Kristian Ravn. 2010. “A Bleak Chapter in Nordic Development Aid History?: The Nordic
            Co-operative Assistance Project in Tanzania.” <em class="calibre4">Scandinavian Journal of History</em> 35 (4):451–70. doi:
            10.1080/03468755.2010.520079.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Petropoulos, Sotiris. 2015. “Opportunities, Challenges and Prospects of South Africa in the
            <abbr>BRICS</abbr>.” In <em class="calibre4">The European Union and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: Complex Relations in the Era of
            Global Governance</em>, edited by Marek Rewizorski, 161–80. Cham: Springer.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Porter, R. S. 1986. “Arab Economic Aid.” <em class="calibre4">Development Policy Review</em> 4 (1):44–68. doi:
            10.1111/j.1467-7679.1986.tb00496.x.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Qobo, Mzukisi, and Mills Soko. 2015. “The Rise of Emerging Powers in the Global Development Finance
            Architecture: The Case of the <abbr>BRICS</abbr> and the New Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">South African Journal
            of International Affairs</em> 22 (3):277–88. doi: 10.1080/10220461.2015.1089785.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ramady, Mohamed, and Wael Mahdi. 2015. <em class="calibre4">OPEC in a Shale Oil World. Where to Next?</em> New York:
            Springer.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Ray, Rebecca, and Rohini Kamal. 2019. “Can South–South Cooperation Compete? The Development Bank of Latin
            America and the Islamic Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):191–220. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12468.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Reisen, Helmut. 2015. “Will the <abbr>AIIB</abbr> and the NDB Help Reform Multilateral Development
            Banking?” <em class="calibre4">Global Policy</em> 6 (3):297–304. doi: 10.1111/1758-5899.12250.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Robinson, William. 2015. “The Transnational State and the <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: A Global Capitalism
            Perspective.” <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em> 36 (1):1–21.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rouis, Mustapha, Steven Tabor, Stefano Migliorisi, Eric Neumayer, and Komlan R. Kounetsron. 2010. <em class="calibre4">Arab
            Development Assistance: Four Decades Of Cooperation</em> Washington, DC: World Bank.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Rūse, Ilze. 2014. “Nordic-Baltic Interaction in European Union Negotiations: Taking Advantage of
            Institutionalized Cooperation.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Baltic Studies</em> 45 (2):229–46. doi:
            10.1080/01629778.2013.846928.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Selbervik, Hilde, and Knut Nygaard. 2006. Nordic Exceptionalism in Development Assistance? Aid Policies and
            the Major Donors: The Nordic Countries. Bergen: Chr. Michelsen Institute (CMI Report R 2006: 8).
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Serrano Oswald, Omar Ramon. 2018. “The New Architects: Brazil, China, and Innovation in Multilateral
            Development Lending.” <em class="calibre4">Public Administration and Development</em> 0 (0):1–12. doi: 10.1002/pad.1837.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Serrano Oswald, Omar Ramon. 2019. “The New Architects: Brazil, China, and Innovation in Multilateral
            Development Lending.” <em class="calibre4">Public Administration and Development</em> 39 (4–5):203–14. doi:
            10.1002/pad.1837.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Sharma, Ruchir. 2012. “Broken BRICs: Why the Rest Stopped Rising.” <em class="calibre4">Foreign Affairs</em> 91 (6):2–7.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shelepov, Andrei. 2016. “Comparative Prospects of the New Development Bank and Asian Infrastructure
            Investment Bank.” <em class="calibre4">International Organisations Research Journal</em> 11:132–52.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shihata, Ibrahim F. I. 1976. “Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries: Agreement Establishing the
            OPEC Special Fund.” <em class="calibre4">International Legal Materials</em> 15 (6):1356–63. doi: 10.1017/S0020782900035002.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shihata, Ibrahim F. I. 1979. “The OPEC Special Fund and the North-South Dialogue.” <em class="calibre4">Third World
            Quarterly</em> 1 (4):28–38.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shihata, Ibrahim F. I. 1980. “Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries: Agreement Establishing the
            OPEC Fund for International Development.” <em class="calibre4">International Legal Materials</em> 19 (4):879–85. doi:
            10.1017/S0020782900039243.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shihata, Ibrahim F. I. 1981. “The OPEC Fund for International Development.” <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em>,
            Taylor &amp; Francis, Ltd, 3 (2):251-268. ISSN: 01436597, 13602241.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Shushan, Debra, and Christopher Marcoux. 2011. “The Rise (and Decline?) of Arab Aid: Generosity and
            Allocation in the Oil Era.” <em class="calibre4">World Development</em> 39 (11):1969–80. doi:
            10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.07.025.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Stephen, Matthew. 2014. “Rising Powers, Global Capitalism, and Liberal Global Governance: A Historical
            Materialist Account of the BRICs Challenge.” <em class="calibre4">European Journal of International Relations</em> 20
            (4):912–38.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Stephen, Matthew. 2017. “Emerging Powers and Emerging Trends in Global Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Global Governance:
            A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations</em> 23 (3):483–502. doi:
            10.1163/19426720-02303009.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Stokke, Olav. 1989. <em class="calibre4">Western Middle Powers and Global Poverty: The Determinants of the Aid Policies of
            Canada, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden</em>. Uppsala: Scandinavian Institute of African
            Studies.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Stuenkel, Oliver. 2015. <em class="calibre4">The <abbr>BRICS</abbr> and the Future of Global Order</em>. Lanham, MD:
            Lexington Books.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Szasz, Paul C. 1999. “Establishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development.” <em class="calibre4">Studies in
            Transnational Legal Policy</em> 31–32:32–43.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Talbot, Ross B. 1980. “The International Fund for Agricultural Development.” <em class="calibre4">Political Science
            Quarterly</em> 95 (2):261–76. doi: 10.2307/2149367.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tasie, C. M. 2013. “Effects of International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Credit Supply on
            Rural Farmers in Rivers State, Nigeria.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Development and Agricultural Economics</em>
            5:186–91. doi: 10.5897/JDAE12.062.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Taylor, Adam. 2015. “A Deadly Stampede Shows the Danger of the Hajj.” <em class="calibre4">New York Times</em>. Accessed 25
            September. <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com" class="item2">https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2015/09/24/a-deadly-stampede-shows-the-danger-of-the-hajj/</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tejas, Aditya. 2015. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> Nations Open New Development Bank in Shanghai as “Alternative” to
            IMF, World Bank.” <em class="calibre4">International Business Times</em>, 21 July. Accessed 21 February 2016. <a href="http://www.ibtimes.com" class="item2">http://www.ibtimes.com/bricsnationsopennewdevelopmentbankshanghaialternativeimfworldbank2017592</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tella, Oluwaseun. 2017. “South Africa in <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: The Regional Power’s Soft Power and Soft
            Balancing.” <em class="calibre4">Politikon</em> 44 (3):387–403. doi: 10.1080/02589346.2017.1295620.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Thakur, Ramesh. 2014. “How Representative are <abbr>BRICS</abbr>?” <em class="calibre4">Third World Quarterly</em> 35
            (10):1791–808.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Toivanen, Paula. ND. “Pasi Hellman and the Evolving Environment of Development Finance.” Suomi/Africa.
            <a href="http://suomiafrica.org" class="item2">http://suomiafrica.org/pasi-hellman-on-development-finance.html</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tok, Evren, Rachael Calleja, and Hanaa El-Ghaish. 2014. “Arab Development Aid and the New Dynamics of
            Multilateralism: Towards Better Governance?” <em class="calibre4">European Scientific Journal</em> Special Edition
            1:591–604.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Troyjo, Marcos. 2017. “The Clash between Deglobalization and Reglobalization.” <em class="calibre4">Huff Post</em>, 1 May.
            Accessed 3 August 2020. <a href="https://www.huffpost.com" class="item2">https://www.huffpost.com/entry/the-clash-between-deglobalization-reglobalization_b_586e8e2de4b0a5e600a78907</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Tudoroiu, Theodor. 2012. “Conceptualizing <abbr>BRICS</abbr>: OPEC as a Mirror.” <em class="calibre4">Asian Journal of
            Political Science</em> 20 (1):23–45. doi: 10.1080/02185377.2012.673857.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Villanger, Espen. 2007. “Arab Foreign Aid: Disbursement Patterns, Aid Policies and Motives.” <em class="calibre4">Forum for
            Development Studies</em> 34 (2):223–56. doi: 10.1080/08039410.2007.9666378.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wang, Hongying. 2017. “New Multilateral Development Banks: Opportunities and Challenges for Global
            Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Global Policy</em> 8 (1):113–18. doi: 10.1111/1758-5899.12396.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wang, Hongying. 2019. “The New Development Bank and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank: China’s
            Ambiguous Approach to Global Financial Governance.” <em class="calibre4">Development and Change</em> 50 (1):221–44. doi:
            10.1111/dech.12473.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wihtol, Robert. 2013. “NDF and the Case for Niche Development Funds.” Development Today. <a href="http://www.development-today.com" class="item2">http://www.development-today.com/magazine/2013/dt_14-15/opinion/ndf_and_the_case_for_niche_development_funds</a>.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wihtol, Robert. 2014. Whither Multilateral Development Finance? In <em class="calibre4"><abbr>AsDBI</abbr> Working Paper
            Series</em>. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wiklund, Claes, and Bengt Sundelius. 1979. “Nordic Cooperation in the Seventies: Trends and Patterns.”
            <em class="calibre4">Scandinavian Political Studies</em> 2 (2):99–120. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9477.1979.tb00209.x.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Williams, Maurice J. 1976. “The Aid Programs of the OPEC Countries.” <em class="calibre4">Foreign Affairs</em> 54
            (2):308–24. doi: 10.2307/20039574.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Wilson, Rodney. 1989. “The Islamic Development Bank’s Role as an Aid Agency for Moslem Countries.”
            <em class="calibre4">Journal of International Development</em> 1 (4):444–66. doi: 10.1002/jid.3380010403.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Woods, Ngaire. 2008. “Whose Aid? Whose Influence? China, Emerging Donors and the Silent Revolution in
            Development Assistance.” <em class="calibre4">International Affairs</em> 84 (6):1205–21. doi:
            10.1111/j.1468-2346.2008.00765.x.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Worrall, James. 2017. <em class="calibre4">International Institutions of the Middle East: The GCC, Arab League, and Arab
            Maghreb Union</em>. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Yousef, Tarik M. 2004. “Development, Growth and Policy Reform in the Middle East and North Africa since
            1950.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of Economic Perspectives</em> 18 (3):91–115. doi: 10.1257/0895330042162322.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Zamora, Stephen. 1980. “Voting in International Economic Organizations.” <em class="calibre4">American Journal of
            International Law</em> 74 (3):566–608. doi: 10.2307/2201650.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Zavyalova, Natalya. 2016. “<abbr>BRICS</abbr> Money Talks: Comparative Socio-cultural Communicative
            Taxonomy of the New Development Bank.” <em class="calibre4">Research in International Business and Finance</em> 39. doi:
            10.1016/j.ribaf.2016.07.039.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Zimmermann, Felix, and Kimberly Smith. 2011. “More Actors, More Money, More Ideas for International
            Development Co-operation.” <em class="calibre4">Journal of International Development</em> 23 (5):722–38. doi:
            10.1002/jid.1796.
          </div>
        </li>

        <li class="calibre6">
          <div class="ref">
            Zuvela, Maya. 2017. “Islamic Development Bank to Revamp, Decentralise Ops.” <em class="calibre4">Reuters</em>, 23 May 2017.
            <a href="https://www.reuters.com" class="item2">https://www.reuters.com/article/us-islamic-develop-strategy-interview/islamic-development-bank-to-revamp-decentralize-ops-idUSKBN18J1JY</a>.
          </div>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    </div>
</body>
</html>
