<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Global Architecture of Multilateral Development Banks</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
<div class="calibre1">
<h1 class="toc"><a href="C02a_toc.xhtml#rchapter7" class="item2">7 The sub-regional development banks</a></h1>

    <div class="item">
      The increasing sophistication of multilateral development finance (MDF) and the growing needs of the Global South
      during the 1960s led to the sub-regional expansion of the multilateral development banks (MDBs). Encompassing
      1960–2006, this phase in the growth of <a class="item2"></a>MDF saw the staggered emergence of 15 relatively
      small banks attempting to fill capital needs unmet by the World Bank and regional development banks (RDBs) and to
      promote sub-regional integration (Wihtol 2014). Labelled the sub-regional development banks (SRDBs), they ‘serve
      a group of borrowers that share borders or geographical or other characteristics and that stand apart from their
      neighbours in other ways’ (Culpeper 1997, 54). Put simply, the SRDBs serve regions-within-regions, such as East
      Africa or the Caribbean. Compared to the World Bank and RDBs, the SRDBs are more varied in operation and
      organisational stability, with a few sub-regionals today rivalling their regional counterparts and others almost
      collapsing due to mismanagement.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      There are 15 functional SRDBs (see <a class="item2">Table 7.1</a>); we are not including the Development Bank of
      the States of Great Lakes (<abbr>BDEGL</abbr>), which collapsed in 1993 due to regional conflict, though it still
      exists on paper. In order of their establishment, the SRDBs are the <a class="item2"></a>Central American Bank
      for Economic Integration (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CABEI</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a>International Bank for
      Economic Cooperation (<a class="item2"></a>IBEC), <a class="item2"></a>East African Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>EADB</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a>Caribbean Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CDB</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a>Development Bank of Latin America (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CAF</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a>International Investment Bank (<a class="item2"></a>IIB),
      <a class="item2"></a>West African Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>BOAD</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a>FONPLATA Development Bank, <a class="item2"></a>ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development (<a class="item2"></a>EBID), <a class="item2"></a>Development Bank of Central African States (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>BDEAC</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a>Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank
      (TDB), <a class="item2"></a>Pacific Islands Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a>PIDB), <a class="item2"></a>Black Sea Trade and Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>BSTDB</abbr>), <a class="item2"></a><a class="item2"></a>ECO Trade and Development Bank (E<a class="item2"></a>TDB), and <a class="item2"></a>Eurasian Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a>EDB). Geographically, geopolitically, and
      historically diverse, the SRDBs comprise a significant and under-researched stratum of the MDBs, all of which
      have inherited their basic structures from the World Bank and RDBs.
    </div>

    <table class="item8" width="98%">
      <caption class="item9">
        <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 7.1</em> Sub-Regional Development Banks overview</a>
      </caption>

      <thead class="item10">
        <tr class="calibre9">
          <th class="item11">Year</th>

          <th class="item11">Sub-regional development banks</th>

          <th class="item11">Region</th>

          <th class="item11">Membership</th>

          <th class="item11">Authorised capital</th>

          <th class="item11">Annual approvals (2018)</th>

          <th class="item11">Credit rating</th>

          <th class="item11">Headquarters</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>

      <tbody class="calibre10">
        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1960</td>

          <td class="item12">Central American Bank for Economic Integration</td>

          <td class="item12">Central America</td>

          <td class="item12">15</td>

          <td class="item12">$7 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$2.44 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">AA</td>

          <td class="item12">Tegucigalpa, Honduras</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1963</td>

          <td class="item12">International Bank for Economic Cooperation</td>

          <td class="item12">Soviet States</td>

          <td class="item12">8</td>

          <td class="item12">$457 million</td>

          <td class="item12">$148 million</td>

          <td class="item12">A-</td>

          <td class="item12">Moscow, Russia</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1967</td>

          <td class="item12">East African Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">East Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">4 (Class A) 9 (Class B)</td>

          <td class="item12">$2.174 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$26.3 million</td>

          <td class="item12">BBB-</td>

          <td class="item12">Kampala, Uganda</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1970</td>

          <td class="item12">Caribbean Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Caribbean</td>

          <td class="item12">28</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.764 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$352 million</td>

          <td class="item12">AA+</td>

          <td class="item12">Wildey, St. Michael, Barbados</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1970</td>

          <td class="item12">Development Bank of Latin America</td>

          <td class="item12">Latin America</td>

          <td class="item12">20</td>

          <td class="item12">$15 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$13.7 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">A+</td>

          <td class="item12">Caracas, Venezuela</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1970</td>

          <td class="item12">International Investment Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Soviet States</td>

          <td class="item12">9</td>

          <td class="item12">$2 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$802.5 million (net)</td>

          <td class="item12">A-</td>

          <td class="item12">Budapest, Hungary</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1973</td>

          <td class="item12">West African Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">West Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">17</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.9 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$709.3 million</td>

          <td class="item12">BBB+</td>

          <td class="item12">Lomé, Togo</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1974</td>

          <td class="item12">FONPLATA Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">River Plate Basin</td>

          <td class="item12">5</td>

          <td class="item12">$3 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$425.1 million</td>

          <td class="item12">A-</td>

          <td class="item12">Santa Cruz, Bolivia</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1975</td>

          <td class="item12">ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development</td>

          <td class="item12">West Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">15</td>

          <td class="item12">$2 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$141.8 million (2017)</td>

          <td class="item12">B+</td>

          <td class="item12">Lomé, Togo</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1975</td>

          <td class="item12">Development Bank of Central African States</td>

          <td class="item12">Central Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">12</td>

          <td class="item12">$2 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$185.0 million (2016)</td>

          <td class="item12">No rating</td>

          <td class="item12">Brazzaville, Republic of Congo</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1985</td>

          <td class="item12">Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Eastern and Southern Africa</td>

          <td class="item12">36</td>

          <td class="item12">$3 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.965 billion (2017)</td>

          <td class="item12">BBB</td>

          <td class="item12">Bujumbura, Burundi</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1989</td>

          <td class="item12">Pacific Islands Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Pacific Islands</td>

          <td class="item12">9</td>

          <td class="item12">$9.3 million</td>

          <td class="item12">$6.6 million</td>

          <td class="item12">No rating</td>

          <td class="item12">Hagatna, Guam</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">1997</td>

          <td class="item12">Black Sea Trade and Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Black Sea Region</td>

          <td class="item12">11</td>

          <td class="item12">$3.78 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$624 million</td>

          <td class="item12">A-</td>

          <td class="item12">Thessaloniki, Greece</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">2005</td>

          <td class="item12">ECO Trade and Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">ECO Member States</td>

          <td class="item12">6</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.5 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$80 million (2017)</td>

          <td class="item12">No rating</td>

          <td class="item12">Istanbul, Turkey</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="calibre9">
          <td class="item12">2006</td>

          <td class="item12">Eurasian Development Bank</td>

          <td class="item12">Eurasia</td>

          <td class="item12">6</td>

          <td class="item12">$7 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">$1.4 billion</td>

          <td class="item12">BBB</td>

          <td class="item12">Almaty, Kazakhstan</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    <div class="source">
      Source: Annual Reports.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      The first SRDB – <abbr>CABEI</abbr> – was established in 1960 and the most recent – EDB – commenced operations in
      2006. Over those five decades, the sub-regional banks came into being due to varied factors. Some were founded to
      address insufficient financing from existing MDBs, as in the case of the <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, <abbr>CDB</abbr>,
      and PIDB. Others emerged as organisations formalising sub-regional communities, such as the <abbr>EADB</abbr>
      within the <a class="item2"></a>East African Community, <abbr>BOAD</abbr> within the West African Monetary Union
      (<a class="item2"></a>WAMU), and TDB – when known as the <a class="item2"></a>Preferential Trade Area (PTA) Bank
      – as the financial arm of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>COMESA</abbr>). Notably, most of these SRDBs are more functional than the communities they were
      designed to support. In addition, many SRDBs have changed their mandates over time, with the IIB – founded as a
      Soviet alternative to the World Bank in 1970 – losing its purpose after the <a class="item2"></a>Cold War but
      being restructured in 2012. Further, while many sub-regionals are small annual financiers, such as the
      <abbr>EADB</abbr> which approved $26.3 million in 2018, others – notably the <abbr>CAF</abbr>, authorised $13.7
      billion in 2017 – have expanded greatly to rival the World Bank and RDBs in annual commitments to their regions.
      Humphrey (2019, 166) classifies the SRDBs as ‘<a class="item2"></a>minilateral development banks,’ or those ‘MDBs
      that were created and are still run by developing countries themselves, and are generally smaller in size
      compared to the World Bank and major regional MDBs.’ They are significant because of their number and because
      they are borrower-led and yet remain under-researched and cloaked in obscurity compared to the larger MDBs.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      The SRDBs face <a class="item2"></a>challenges in common with the other MDBs, as well as unique problems given
      their smaller size, scope, and operational capacity. In broad terms, the SRDBs are like other MDBs. As <a class="item2">Chapter 5</a> demonstrated, the MDBs follow the same plan established by the World Bank, which is a
      strong reason for looking at them together. They are created and owned by groups of states that make an initial
      capital subscription and they seek to borrow funds from markets, which they on-lend. And yet there are
      considerable differences between the sub-regional banks and the larger MDBs. Existing below the ‘mezzanine level’
      of the RDBs, the SRDBs excel most where a specialisation defines their mandate and operations (Banda 2015, 4).
      Attempting to comparatively analyse 15 organisations is problematic, but broad trends emerge from the SRDBs that
      make possible indicative understandings.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      Starting with the <a class="item2"></a>positive aspects, many Global South SRDBs have achieved good credit
      ratings without capital from the Global North and have opted for alternative approaches to conditionality that
      make them attractive to borrowing countries (United Nations 2005, xiv). In addition, several SRDBs provide
      non-traditional assistance – for example, the PIDB offers residential and consumer loans – and almost all are
      owned and operated by Global South borrowing countries, a great contrast to the influence of the Global North,
      especially the US, in the World Bank and RDBs. They have also facilitated sub-regionalisation (Zappile 2016).
      There seems to be a greater sense of borrowing country ownership than in the World Bank; as Gutner (2002, 33)
      highlights, the World Bank’s ‘executive directors represent over 180 countries and have no real control over the
      Bank’s projects and policies.’ Given the tension between higher-level governance and senior management, this
      reveals an interesting line of thought about MDBs with smaller memberships; it may lead to more control and
      influence by higher-level governance, thus the political and developmental goals of member states may be more
      apparent. The SRDBs can also provide more specialised financial assistance on better terms than private banks and
      invest in countries the World Bank regards as risky (United Nations 2005, 125–6). Simply put, the SRDBs can
      perform functions that global and regional MDBs cannot, this is their comparative advantage (Ocampo 2002, Prada
      2012, Sagasti and Prada 2006). Humphrey (2017) highlights that while member countries invest relatively small
      amounts each in SRDBs, that amount is compounded by their collective efforts and borrowings on international
      capital markets. While this may not be a significant benefit for very wealthy countries, it is very significant
      for relatively poorer countries that are able to pool their resources to achieve more than they would otherwise.
      In this way, SRDBs can be justified on several grounds: they are better able to accommodate borrower
      circumstances than the World Bank; country members eligible for loans are the main shareholders; and, countries
      with poor credit grades individually can improve their financial standing collectively (Banda 2015).
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      Despite these positive aspects, there are many obstacles to effective SRDB operations, including low capital
      bases compared to the larger MDBs and capability limitations as the more prestigious RDBs often attract higher
      quality staff applicants than the sub-regional banks (Zappile 2016). Further, SRBDs face great difficulties
      during regional debt crises. As illustrations, the <abbr>EADB</abbr> and <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> in Southern Africa
      suffered greatly during the extended debt crisis of 1980s and 1990s due to failed member integration, lack of
      political commitment to regional actions, non-repayments, worsening portfolio performance, reluctance to borrow
      from foreign donors, and deteriorating economic conditions (Mistry and Kritzinger-van Niekerk 1998). In addition,
      many SRDBs lack robust accountability and transparency mechanisms compared to the World Bank and RDBs (Park
      2014). For example, the <abbr>CABEI</abbr> demonstrates medium levels of accountability through a Compliance
      Office, Institutional Responsibility Plan, and Environment and Social Policy, while the <abbr>BOAD</abbr> only
      provides financial audits and the <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> only has an Internal Audit Department for complaint contacts
      (Zappile 2016). Also, only a few SRDBs maintain operational transparency, with the <abbr>CDB</abbr> being an
      exemplar with an Information Services Centre and Official Information Disclosure policy (Zappile 2016). Poor
      accountability and transparency derive from several factors, including limited resources and personnel capacity,
      as well as the political motivations of leading shareholders and whether accountability and transparency are an
      important concern for borrowing members. They have also had relatively little academic and civil society
      attention, again iterating that their operations are mired in obscurity.
    </div>

    <div class="item1">
      The remainder of this chapter provides an analytical overview of the 15 functional SRDBs, beginning
      chronologically with the <abbr>CABEI</abbr> and concluding with the EDB.
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.1 <a class="item6"></a>Central American Bank for economic integration</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <a class="item2"></a>General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration – signed on 13 December 1960
        by Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua – sought to develop a Central American common market and
        free trade area to promote sub-regional integration and joint development. Among other provisions, the Treaty
        established the <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, which began operations as the first SRDB on 31 May 1961. Costa Rica joined
        in September 1963 as the fifth founding member. Proposed as the financial arm of Central American integration
        and development, the <abbr>CABEI</abbr>’s Constitutive Agreement prioritises infrastructural, industrial,
        agricultural, economic, social, and environmental programmes and projects that develop individual countries and
        promote regional integration, thus resembling the RDBs established before it. Today, the SRDB is part of the
        Central American Integration System (SICA, in Spanish: <em class="calibre4">Sistema de la Integración Centroamericana</em>), the
        economic and political organisation of Central American states established in December 1991.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>CABEI</abbr>’s five founding members achieved independence from Spanish colonial rule in 1821, prior to
        which they were organised as a single administrative unit (Simmonds 1967). Cevallos (1996, 246) notes that
        ‘integration and unionism are not new terms to Central Americans. The nations of Costa Rica, Guatemala,
        Honduras, El Salvador, and Nicaragua established the Federation of Central American States immediately after
        their independence from Spain in 1821.’ After the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War, regional integration
        was formalised through the Central American Common Market (<abbr>CACM</abbr>, or <em class="calibre4">Mercomun</em>) of 1961,
        which sought to create a customs union, adopt common external tariffs, eliminate intra-regional tariffs, and
        develop joint industrial planning. Both the <abbr>CACM</abbr> and <abbr>CABEI</abbr> were created through
        several years of slow progress towards regional integration beginning in 1952 and continued throughout the
        1960s (Cochrane 1965, Duvall 1964). <abbr>CABEI</abbr> emerged from within the <abbr>CACM</abbr> framework and
        ‘is considered by some to be the only part of the integration effort that has remained functional’ (Cevallos
        1996, 248).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        While the 1960s saw <abbr>CABEI</abbr> grow due to global conditions favourable to <a class="item2"></a>international market borrowing, regional integration was stymied by emerging conflict between
        Honduras and El Salvador in 1969, which undermined <a class="item2"></a><abbr>CACM</abbr>. This was compounded
        by the 1973 oil price shock that revealed Central America significantly over-extended in debt; this came to a
        head with the 1982 debt crisis, as well as violent conflicts in Nicaragua and El Salvador (Cevallos 1996).
        These difficulties motivated <abbr>CABEI</abbr> to open membership to non-regional shareholders in 1989; the
        SRDB lost the capacity to effectively support Central America during the 1980s and sought help from
        international sources, which routinely came with significant conditions attached (Cevallos 1996). In the 1990s,
        with an expanded membership, <abbr>CABEI</abbr> once again became a meaningful sub-regional organisation by
        improving its administrative governance, punctually servicing its debt obligations, and promoting sub-regional
        trade liberalisation as part of SICA (Cevallos 1996).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>CABEI</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>2015–19 Institutional Strategy focussed on sustainable
        development and competitiveness and its priority sectors were competitiveness services, financial
        intermediation, development finance, energy, rural development and the environment, human development, and
        productive and social infrastructure (<abbr>CABEI</abbr> 2015). Such a development plan would not be
        out-of-place in the World Bank or the Global South RDBs and the focus on financial intermediation is
        particularly telling in terms of the influence of the World Bank. Its current <a class="item2"></a>2020–24
        Strategic Framework focusses on internal organisational changes: strengthening its governance transparency and
        accountability, as well as fiscal austerity; improving project efficiency; promoting regional integration
        effectively; and, consolidating and strengthening its financial capacity (<abbr>CABEI</abbr> 2020). Both the
        2015–19 Strategy and 2020–24 Framework prioritise climate action, long recognised as a leading sub-regional
        issue.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Headquartered in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, with regional offices in Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Costa
        Rica, along with its five regional founding members, <abbr>CABEI</abbr> has three regional and seven
        non-regional non-founding members. The regional founding members are the largest shareholders, each holding
        12.17% of shares. This reveals a trend in most SRDBs, a shareholder base primarily controlled by regional
        members. When <abbr>CABEI</abbr> opened membership to non-regional members in September 1989, the first new
        entrants were Taiwan (rare for an MDB given tensions this would cause with China) and Mexico in 1992, followed
        by Argentina and Colombia in 1995 and 1997. South Korea is the most recent member, joining in 2019, just after
        Cuba in 2018. Taiwan is the second largest shareholder with 9.18% share participation. The <a class="item2"></a>regional founding members control 60.86% of shareholdings while the non-regional members control
        30.72%, with Taiwan and South Korea holding over half of that. Interestingly, Argentina and Colombia – as
        non-regional members – are permitted to request loans and guarantees, rare in the SRDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        An Executive President and Executive Vice President lead <abbr>CABEI</abbr>, like the other MDBs, though there
        are caveats about prospective candidates. As per Article 20 of <abbr>CABEI</abbr>’s Constitutive Agreement, the
        Executive President’s term is five years and may be re-elected once only and they must be a national of the
        regional founding states and of ‘recognised capacity and broad experience in economic, financial, or banking
        affairs.’ The Executive Vice President, as per Article 21, must be a different nationality from the Executive
        President; a device to balance shareholder influence. Fifteen <a class="item2"></a>Executive Presidents have
        led the <abbr>CABEI</abbr>; for an MDB, this is a large number.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>CABEI</abbr> is the largest MDB operating in the Central American region. Over its first two decades,
        over three quarters of loans focussed on project lending for physical infrastructure, electricity and water,
        housing, and manufacturing (Cáceres 1985). Between 2005 and 2016, <abbr>CABEI</abbr> loans totalled 47% of
        disbursements to the region, compared to 33% by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and 20% by the World
        Bank (<abbr>CABEI</abbr> 2016). The five founding member countries have received 95% of all loan approvals.
        Between 2011 and 2017, annual loan approvals averaged $1.7 billion. Given that <abbr>CABEI</abbr> approved 25
        projects in 2017, the average loan size was $68 million. Over 90% of all loans have been approved to the public
        sector. This lack of a shift towards private sector engagement is quite different from the lending activities
        of the World Bank Group and RDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, <abbr>CABEI</abbr> was the first SRDB and preceded the founding of the African and Asian MDBs in
        the 1960s. In organisational structure, it closely resembles the IADB, which preceded it, including a mandate
        to promote individual country and <a class="item2"></a>regional development. Many later SRDBs, notably Latin
        American and African sub-regional banks, mirror its form closely. <abbr>CABEI</abbr> is an important example of
        the role envisaged for financial arms in sub-regional integration.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.2 <a class="item6"></a>International Bank for Economic Cooperation</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The IBEC was established on 22 October 1963 as the first multilateral bank of the former USSR. It preceded the
        IIB by several years. Its initial aims were to build economic and trade cooperation between <a class="item2"></a>Council of Mutual Economic Assistance (<abbr>CMEA</abbr>) countries, also known as COMECON, by
        means of multilateral settlements in transferable rubles and convertible currency. Just like the IIB, IBEC
        would revise its operational approach following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War.
        As per its current Establishing Agreement, the former Soviet MDB’s aims in the 21st century include promoting
        the development of foreign economic ties between member countries and facilitating the transition of interested
        member countries from command- to market-based economics (IBEC 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        From its establishment, IBEC was created as a Soviet alternative to the Global North-led international
        financial institutions (IFIs), just like the IIB, although its original role was envisaged as an early IMF-like
        clearing or settlements house. However, it also included an MDB element as it provided credits for expanding
        exports and industrial investment and other productive investments (Francuz 1969). It originally used
        transferable rubles as its currency and subscriptions were relative to the size of exports in
        intra-<abbr>CMEA</abbr> trade (Francuz 1969). Of an initial capital of 300 million transferable rubles, 20% was
        initially to be paid-in but this quickly increased to 30%. Interestingly for a Soviet MDB, it began purchasing
        and selling securities in 1986 to develop its capital base and operational reach. With the end of the <a class="item2"></a>Cold War, it discarded the ruble on 1 January 1991 and replaced it with the ECU, the currency
        predecessor to the Euro. At the time, its authorised capital was ECU 400 million. On 1 January 1999, the Euro
        became its currency of balance.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Beginning in 2002, IBEC undertook several institutional and organisational restructurings in order to better
        reflect a <a class="item2"></a>‘modern MDB’ (IBEC 2018). In 2015, the IBEC Council approved the 2016–20
        Strategy to develop the MDB’s role in the former <abbr>CMEA</abbr> region, prioritising foreign trade
        operations in IBEC member countries. In 2018, its mission was revised to focus on lending financial support to
        foreign trade operations conducted by companies in member states and facilitating integration into global value
        chains and boosting competitiveness with priorities on social and economic development in member states (IBEC
        2018). At the same time, the IBEC in 2017 received its first international credit rating: BBB-.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        IBEC now has eight member countries: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation,
        Slovak Republic, and Vietnam. Cuba was a member country, joining in 1974, but mutual financial relations were
        settled in 2013, meaning that Cuba formally cut ties with the MDB. Vietnam joined in 1977, at the formal end of
        the Vietnam War. The Russian Federation is the largest shareholder with 51.6% shareholding, followed by the
        Czech Republic (13.3%) and Poland (12%). This trend is reflective of the other Russian-led MDBs, whereby IBEC
        could be argued to be an extension of Russian foreign and economic policy.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The Council of the Bank is IBEC’s highest administrative body and its representatives must come from Ministries
        of Finance or Central Banks. Denis Ivanov, a Russian national, is the incumbent Chairperson of the Board. He
        was in the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1997–2004) and head of the London office of the Vnesheconombank
        (2004–13), the Russian state development corporation. In 2013, Ivanov was made Deputy Chairperson of the Board
        of the IIB and was appointed Chairperson of the Board of IBEC in April 2018. Ivanov’s predecessor was Vladimir
        Bely, also a Russian national, who assumed office in 2007.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Like other MDBs, the IBEC partners with non-financial institutions in IBEC member countries, international
        institutions, development banks, and export credit agencies, and private commercial banks. Such relationships
        are necessary for a modern MDB operating in global financial markets, as well as demonstrating the
        interconnectedness of MDF as an institutional field. IBEC’s lending portfolio includes loans to banks issued
        for trade finance, syndicated loans to banks to support the economies of member countries, loans to the
        customers of non-banking organisations, and loans and investment securities (IBEC 2019). Its main activities
        include trade finance operations and finance to support export and import operations – it is thus focussed on
        intra-regional trade and financial integration. In this sense, it is like the trade and development banks that
        started with the PTA Bank in 1985. In addition to its main activities, IBEC also provides commercial loans
        (short-term credits) and extends credit lines to private corporations (IBEC 2020). In 2017, its working loan
        portfolio was €21.8 million. This increased considerably to €129.6 million in 2018: €83.3 million for loans to
        non-banking institutions, €36.8 million in trade finance loans to banks, and €9.5 million syndicated loans to
        banks (IBEC 2019). The significant increase in the loan portfolio between 2017 and 2018 was the result of
        initiatives begun in 2016 to improve IBEC’s operational structure to better resemble a ‘modern MDB,’ so while
        it was not founded as an MDB, we think it now qualifies as such.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.3 <a class="item6"></a>East African Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <abbr>EADB</abbr> was established in 1967 as one of the main institutions of the East African Community.
        The Community had existed in various forms since the 1940s: the <a class="item2"></a>East African High
        Commission (1948–61 under colonial administration), <a class="item2"></a>East African Common Services
        Organisation (1961–67 during the decolonising transition), and <a class="item2"></a>East African Community
        (1967–77). The <abbr>EADB</abbr> became operational very quickly after its three founding members gained
        independence from colonial rule: Tanzania (1961), Uganda (1962), and Kenya (1963). This is a very different
        situation from <abbr>CABEI</abbr>; its founding members achieved independence in the early 1800s.
        <abbr>EADB</abbr> resembles the African Development Bank (<abbr>AfDB</abbr>) in demonstrating from the outset a
        strong desire to resist the lingering influences of colonial rule and to be an East African organisation. As
        per the <abbr>EADB</abbr>’s Charter, its mandate is to promote sustainable socioeconomic development in East
        Africa through development finance and advisory services, with an emphasis on projects that ‘generally promote
        the development of the region.’
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In 1977, the East African Community was dissolved. Several factors led to the collapse, including significant
        tensions growing between member countries due to their conflicting economic systems – at the time, Kenya was
        pushing capitalist private sector expansion while Tanzania was maintaining Julius Nyerere’s <a class="item2"></a>‘African socialist’ economic model. Following the dissolution of the Community in 1977, the
        <abbr>EADB</abbr> was re-established as an independent organisation under its own Charter in 1980. As part of
        its re-establishment, its role and mandate were revised, its operational scope broadened to include financial
        services targeting socioeconomic development and regional integration, its membership opened to non-regional
        actors, its administration decentralised to country offices in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, and it introduced
        advisory and consultancy services. The re-establishment significantly restructured the SRDB, aligning it with
        structures and practices of earlier MDBs. In July 2000, the treaty establishing the new East African Community
        (EAC) entered into force and the <abbr>EADB</abbr> once again became the financial pillar of the sub-regional
        community.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>EADB</abbr> shareholding is divided into Class A and Class B shareholders. Class A shareholders are the
        current four East African member countries – Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Rwanda – that hold over 87% of
        shares. Class B shareholders hold 13% of shares and include three development finance institutions
        (<abbr>DFI</abbr>s) – the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, Netherlands Development Company, and German Investment and
        Development Company – and six commercial banks: Nordea Bank (Stockholm), SBIC Africa Holdings (Johannesburg),
        Barclays Bank (London), Standard Chartered Bank (London), Consortium of Yugoslav Institutions, and Commercial
        Bank of Africa (Nairobi). The <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, Barclays Bank, and Consortium of Yugoslav Institutions joined
        in 1970, demonstrating the early need for additional stakeholders to supplement early limited capital; it was
        the first MDB with such a diverse shareholding. With the <abbr>BDEGL</abbr> non-functional, Rwanda and Burundi
        joined the modern <abbr>EAC</abbr> in 2008; Rwanda joined the <abbr>EADB</abbr> in 2008 too, while Burundi is
        currently undergoing admission. South Sudan joined the <abbr>EAC</abbr> in 2016, so there is a possibility it
        could join the <abbr>EADB</abbr> in the future. Rwanda’s shareholding increased from 1% when it first joined to
        9.51% in 2018, reflecting its rapidly growing economy. In 2015, <abbr>EADB</abbr>’s Governing Council agreed to
        increase the authorised capital 100% from $1.08 billion to $2.16 billion (following an increase from $270
        million to $1.08 billion in 2003) to cater for Burundi’s future admission and an increase in Class B
        shareholdings, while maintaining the <abbr>EADB</abbr> Charter’s requirements that Class B shareholders are
        limited to 10% of total authorised shares – although, in 2018, Class B shares were 12.67% following a Governing
        Council resolution authorising the increase in 2013. Notably, in 2015, the <abbr>EADB</abbr> was the first East
        African organisation to achieve a BBB- credit rating, a consequence of its expanded capital base as well as
        organisational reforms instituted by incumbent Director General Vivienne Yeda.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A Director General leads the <abbr>EADB</abbr>. Tracing the <a class="item2"></a>history of the East African
        SRDB reveals considerable turmoil, including financial mismanagement, as well as success. The first Director
        General Iddi Simba recounts that, at the time of establishing the <abbr>EADB</abbr>,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          globally, development banking was a new industry and in East Africa we had absolutely no development bank
          anywhere. Needless to say, there was no expertise in the region that could guide and advise on how to start
          and run a development bank.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (cited in <abbr>EADB</abbr> 2017, 16)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        In fact, when Simba received the Charter and $2 million in initial capital contributions, a headquarters had
        not yet been established. To seek advice, Simba ‘travelled to Scandinavian countries to recruit expatriate
        experts who came to Kampala to join the Bank’ (<abbr>EADB</abbr> 2017, 17).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>EADB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>early (mis)fortunes were deeply shaped by its founding
        <abbr>EAC</abbr> member countries. Uganda was especially a source of concern, starting with Idi Amin’s
        dictatorial regime, the uncertainty that followed his deposition, and then the 1981–86 <a class="item2"></a>Ugandan Civil War. Such instability led the <abbr>EADB</abbr> to effectively lose one founding
        member country. Coupled with the collapse of the <abbr>EAC</abbr> in 1977, the <abbr>EADB</abbr> had two
        consecutive Acting Director Generals: Henry Kajura (1978–79) and David Mulira (1979–81).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As part of <abbr>EADB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>restructuring under its own Charter in 1980, the East
        Africa SRDB appointed two non-African Director Generals in the 1980s: Lars Ekengren of Sweden and Per
        Aasmundrud of Norway. They were chosen because the ‘political situation was tense at the time and the
        Presidents could not agree on the nationality of the new Director General’ (Ekengren cited in <abbr>EADB</abbr>
        2017, 20). As a result, Acting Director General Mulira turned to the Swedish International Development
        Cooperation Agency (SIDA), which had existing relations with the <abbr>EADB</abbr> since signing a line of
        credit in 1972, for advice. SIDA then approached the Nordic Investment Bank (NIB), where Ekengren worked as a
        Senior Advisor (Ekengren cited in <abbr>EADB</abbr> 2017, 20). Aasmundrud was similarly drawn from Nordic
        development banks.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The SRDB was ‘in a deep crisis’ during the 1980s with ‘hardly any resources in foreign exchange’ and ‘was
        practically in default with the World Bank’ (Ekengren cited in <abbr>EADB</abbr> 2017, 20). Further, it
        ‘experienced more or less continuous delays in transfer of payments… straining the Bank’s liquidity’
        (Aasmundrud cited in <abbr>EADB</abbr> 2012). In other words, the <abbr>EADB</abbr> was close to collapse. In
        response, Ekengren established an Advisory Panel in 1981 to improve the SRDB’s reputation as a stable financial
        entity for global financial markets and Aasmundrud oversaw a doubling of shareholder capital in 1986 from SDR
        40 million to SDR 80 million.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Despite the progress of the 1980s, a 1997 quantitative study found that the <abbr>EADB</abbr> had ‘not lived up
        to the expectations of those who were instrumental in its establishment,’ with problems undermining the
        identification, financing, and post-evaluation of projects (Murinde and Kariisa-Kasa 1997, 100). While it
        became the first entity to issue corporate bonds in East Africa, in 1996 to the Kenyan capital market and in
        1997 in Uganda and 1999 in Tanzania, its non-performing loan portfolio reached 30% in the early 2000s.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The 2000s saw the expulsion of several leading <abbr>EADB</abbr> officials, including Director General Godfrey
        Tumusiime in 2008 – the Board of Governors cancelled his contract due to financial mismanagement. The Bank
        posted losses in the millions. Incumbent Director General Vivienne Yeda, who assumed office in January 2009 and
        who previously served as the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>’s Resident Representative and Country Manager for Zambia,
        resuscitated the spiralling SRDB. In 2013, the <abbr>EADB</abbr> was ranked the Best Performing
        <abbr>DFI</abbr> in Africa by the Association of African <abbr>DFI</abbr>s and, in 2014, Yeda received the
        <em class="calibre4">African Banker</em> magazine’s African Banker of the Year Award, the Africa-America Institute’s Business
        Leader Award, and the Centre for Economic and Leadership Development’s Africa Female Economic Champion Award
        for her successful revitalisation of the <abbr>EADB</abbr> through a significant organisational restructuring
        and the recovery of outstanding loans.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>EADB</abbr>’s activities are diverse and include <a class="item2"></a>financing operations (capital,
        lines of credit, bond issuance, and co-financing arrangements), products and services (real estate and property
        development, asset finance, trade finance, equity, and venture capital), and advisory and consulting services.
        Its primary lending instruments are short-, medium-, and long-term loans. Between 2004 and 2015, the annual
        average approved investments totalled $73.3 million. This, however, does not adequately reflect the difficult
        period faced during the final years of Director General Tumusiime’s term when approvals dropped from $108.6
        million in 2006 to $31.5 million in 2008. Under Director General Yeda, annual approvals increased to $78
        million in 2012 and $184 million in 2015 before declining to $22 million in 2017 and $26 million in 2018. The
        considerable fluctuations in annual approvals over the 2010s are a consequence of Yeda’s reforms to ensure
        reliable projects capable of repayment are approved as well as recipient demand for projects.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the <abbr>EADB</abbr> reveals the potential significance of well-managed SRDBs in supporting their
        borrowing member countries and the considerable obstacles posed by a small capital base and membership. It
        demonstrates the narrow margins between success and failure for a Global South-led MDB.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.4 <a class="item6"></a>Caribbean Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Following the 1966 <a class="item2"></a>Canada/Commonwealth Caribbean Conference, a recommendation was made to
        investigate the feasibility of a financial institution to serve the Commonwealth Caribbean countries and
        territories. In July 1967, a UNDP report recommended the creation of a Caribbean development bank with $50
        million capital; such an institution was justified given that during the 1950s and 1960s ‘the smaller colonial
        territories of the Eastern Caribbean did not have access to the major international lending institutions’ and
        concerns that ‘without economic and social development, political unrest could spread from one island to
        another’ (Ingham and Figueroa 2009, 4). The <a class="item2"></a>UNDP report was accepted by a meeting of
        <a class="item2"></a>officials in Georgetown, Guyana, in August 1967, where a committee formed to draft the
        <abbr>CDB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>Establishing Agreement. The draft Agreement was submitted in 1968,
        signed in Kingston, Jamaica, on 18 October 1969, and entered into force on 26 January 1970. The
        <abbr>CDB</abbr> began operations in January 1970 and later became an associate institution of the Caribbean
        Community (<abbr>CARICOM</abbr>), which was established in 1973. In <abbr>CARICOM</abbr>, the <abbr>CDB</abbr>
        serves a role comparable to the <abbr>EADB</abbr> in the <abbr>EAC</abbr>, as the financial arm of a
        sub-regional organisation.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The Agreement Establishing the <abbr>CDB</abbr> states its purposes as contributing ‘to the harmonious economic
        growth and development of the member countries of the Caribbean’ and promoting ‘economic cooperation and
        integration among them, having special and urgent regard to the needs of the less developed members of the
        region.’ The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) includes an explicit reference to
        less developed members but the ‘special and urgent regards’ is new and reflects growing concerns about
        developing countries expressed in documents like the New International Economic Order (<a class="item2"></a>NIEO). In pursuing its purposes, the <abbr>CDB</abbr>’s functions include financing projects,
        providing technical assistance, supporting regional financial institutions, stimulating regional capital market
        development, and mobilising financial resources from within and outside of the Caribbean. The <abbr>CDB</abbr>
        began operations with $25 million in paid-in capital. By 2018, its callable capital reached $1.375 billion and
        paid-in capital was $388.5 million. As a result, the <abbr>CDB</abbr> has been regarded as playing ‘an
        important role in the mobilisation of resources for investment in parts of the Caribbean’ (Hardy 1995, 1).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are 28 regional, other regional, and non-regional member countries in the <abbr>CDB</abbr>. There are 19
        regional Caribbean members that control 55% of shareholding, with Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago controlling
        over 17% each, while most other regional members each control less than 1%. Regional members are the only
        shareholders eligible to borrow. The remaining shareholders are the other regional members – Brazil, Colombia,
        Mexico, and Venezuela holding close to 9.5% collectively – and non-regional members – Canada, China, Germany,
        Italy, and the UK together controlling 35%. Although other regional and non-regional members are not eligible
        to borrow funds, they have voting rights. This is significant as the five non-regional members individually
        control larger shareholdings than most regional borrowing members, except for Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago.
        So, in 2018, Anguilla, Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, and Turks and Caicos Islands shared one
        Governor and Alternate Governor, while the non-regional members have one Governor and Alternate Governor each.
        This is a common trait among many SRDBs, where the influence of non-<a class="item2"></a>regional members has
        grown thanks to small MDBs attempting to expand their capital base through the admission of strong,
        non-regional shareholders.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>CDB</abbr> President is Chairperson of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer. Five
        Presidents have led the <abbr>CDB</abbr>, all appointed from the borrowing member countries as outlined in
        <a class="item2">Table 7.2</a>. Hardy (1995, 4) comments that the <abbr>CDB</abbr> ‘has been very fortunate in
        its <a class="item2"></a>presidents, who have imparted a strong sense of purpose and stability in the
        institution’; many have come from academic backgrounds with specialised knowledge in development economics, a
        trait rare in the leadership of the MDBs as most come from commercial finance and banking backgrounds.
      </div>

      <table class="item8" width="98%">
        <caption class="item9">
          <a class="item2"><em class="calibre4">Table 7.2</em> Caribbean Development Bank Presidents</a>
        </caption>

        <thead class="item10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <th class="item11">President</th>

            <th class="item11">Country and Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Tenure</th>

            <th class="item11">Details</th>
          </tr>
        </thead>

        <tbody class="calibre10">
          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Sir William Arthur Lewis</td>

            <td class="item12">St Nevis</td>

            <td class="item12">1970–73</td>

            <td class="item12">Nobel Prize winning economist making significant contributions to economic development,
            industrial structure, and the history of world economics. Lewis ‘laid the foundation for the Bank as a
            sound project-lending and financial institution. He also drew attention to the structural problems (low
            savings, low productivity, and overvalued exchange rates) that have long constrained the region’s economic
            growth’ (Hardy, 1995, 4).</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">William G. Demas</td>

            <td class="item12">Trinidad and Tobago</td>

            <td class="item12">1974–88</td>

            <td class="item12">Distinguished economic scholar and Caribbean leader. Serving three terms, Demas ‘guided
            the Bank through a period of steady expansion up to the early 1980s and the subsequent period of austerity
            for the borrowers and the Bank. During his tenure, he emphasised the need for increasing food production,
            improving the operations of the DFCs, supporting regional projects, and coordinating aid and national
            development strategies’ (Hardy, 1995, 4).</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Sir Neville Vernon Nicholls</td>

            <td class="item12">Barbados</td>

            <td class="item12">1988–2001</td>

            <td class="item12">A Barbadian scholar, Nicholls served as <abbr>CDB</abbr> Vice President (Operations) at
            the time of his election to President. He saw ‘the <abbr>CDB</abbr> through a difficult transition period,
            with the departure of four senior officials and several project analysts and economists in 1988–1989. He
            also inherited the problem of widespread arrears on <abbr>CDB</abbr> loans, which the Bank addressed by
            refusing the approve new loans (or disburse existing ones) until arrears were cleared’ (Hardy, 1995,
            4).</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Dr Compton Bourne</td>

            <td class="item12">Guyana</td>

            <td class="item12">2001–11</td>

            <td class="item12">Academic economist focused on public policy and institutional management. In 2010,
            Bourne reflected on the role of the <abbr>CDB</abbr>: ‘For the Caribbean, economic integration is another
            essential plank in the development architecture. The <abbr>CDB</abbr>, in keeping with its Charter mandate,
            diligently pursues this objective, contributing actively to the establishment of critical institutions for
            economic integration and seeking to ensure balanced development among the members of the Caribbean
            Community’ (Bourne, 2010).</td>
          </tr>

          <tr class="calibre9">
            <td class="item12">Dr William Warren Smith</td>

            <td class="item12">Jamaica</td>

            <td class="item12">2011–Present</td>

            <td class="item12">Smith also served as <abbr>CDB</abbr> Vice President (Operations) at the time of his
            election to President. In 2018, he outlined his vision of the <abbr>CDB</abbr>: ‘The events of last year’s
            hurricane season led to the adoption of the slogan “Build back better”. It underscores the determination of
            the people of our Region to triumph over our vulnerabilities. We have a long and proud history of
            triumphing over adversity. We hail from small and relatively poor countries, yet we compete and perform
            with distinction, on the world stage, in varied fields of endeavour, be it business, sports, the creative
            arts or politics’ (Smith, 2018).</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <div class="source">
        Source: Annual Reports and <abbr>CDB</abbr> Website.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>CDB</abbr> manages the Special Development Fund (SDF) and United Special Development Fund (SDFU). The
        SDF, established in 1970, provides concessional loans for high development priority projects. Like those from
        the International Development Association (<a class="item2"></a>IDA), SDF loans have longer maturities and
        grace periods and lower interest rates than OCR loans. The SDFU was launched in 1982 to streamline SDF
        operations, which suffered problems like approvals with differing terms and conditions creating funding
        inefficiencies. Thus, it provided fixed concessional lending arrangements. Contributions to the SDFU are
        provided in four-year replenishments from regional and non-regional shareholders. Historically, concessional
        financing comprises a significant portion of cumulative <abbr>CDB</abbr> lending.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1970 and 2018, the <abbr>CDB</abbr> approved $3.3 billion in OCR financing and $1.9 billion in
        <a class="item2"></a>SDF/<a class="item2"></a>SDFU financing. Annual OCR and concessional approvals are small,
        reflecting the relatively small size of the Bank and its member countries. Between 2007 and 2016, average
        annual OCR approvals were $143.5 million and average annual <a class="item2"></a>SDF approvals were $59.2
        million. In 2018, OCR approvals by sector were general budget support ($139.9 million), transportation and
        communication ($87.3 million), environmental sustainability and disaster risk reduction ($38 million), energy
        ($14.5 million), water and sanitation ($10.5 million), and social infrastructure and services ($4.9 million).
        Thus, <abbr>CDB</abbr> provides a remarkable high level of budgetary support and it would be interesting to
        examine if there is much conditionality attached.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>CDB</abbr> also manages a robust portfolio of project-related and non-project- related technical
        assistance. Project-related technical assistance includes pre- investment studies, project preparation and loan
        appraisal support, training, and remedial assistance to correct project operations. Non-project-related
        technical assistance is broader in scope and can involve consultancies, institutional support to national and
        regional bodies, and training programmes for government departments. The Technical Cooperation Division (TCD)
        coordinates the <abbr>CDB</abbr>’s technical assistance portfolio and its mission statement is ‘To lead the
        [<abbr>CDB</abbr>’s] efforts to build capacity, transfer knowledge and skills, and strengthen institutions in
        Borrowing Member Countries (<abbr>BMCs</abbr>) by working closely with other Divisions, <a class="item2"></a><abbr>BMCs</abbr>, and development partners.’ The TCD is not unique to the <abbr>CDB</abbr>; most
        MDBs recognise the importance of advisory services to effective project implementation and have established
        departments to manage service delivery.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the <abbr>CDB</abbr> has a reputation as a stable and effective if relatively small SRDB. While
        illustrating the difficulties many Global South-led MDBs face, including the practical need to admit
        non-regional shareholders thereby potentially eroding sub-regional autonomy, it nonetheless demonstrates that
        with strong leadership, regional support, and the cultivation of a developmental niche, the SRDBs can be
        effective in pursuing their mandates.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.5 <a class="item6"></a>Development Bank of Latin America</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <a class="item2"></a>Agreement Establishing the Andean Development Corporation (<abbr>CAF</abbr>, in
        Spanish: <em class="calibre4">Corporación Andina de Fomento</em>) was signed on 7 February 1968 by Bolivia, Chile, Colombia,
        Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela. In May 1969, the <a class="item2"></a>Cartagena Agreement was signed, creating
        the political framework for the Andean Community. The <abbr>CAF</abbr> was designed to serve a significant
        financial role in the Community, and it formally commenced operations on 8 June 1970. Bolivia and Ecuador
        received <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s first loans in 1971, investment projects financing rice storage networks and
        fisheries complexes. While initially a very small MDB, the <abbr>CAF</abbr> is a rare example of an SRDB that
        has grown over the decades to come to rival the annual approvals of the World Bank and RDBs (specifically, the
        IADB) operating in its region.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 2006 and 2015, the <abbr>CAF</abbr> redefined its mission and transformed itself from a sub-regional
        Andean financial entity into a Latin American institution. In 2010, <abbr>CAF</abbr> adopted a new name:
        Development Bank of Latin America (in Spanish: <em class="calibre4">Banco de Desarrollo de América Latina</em>). Despite the
        name change, the acronym <abbr>CAF</abbr> continues to be used. The new name reflects the growth of
        <abbr>CAF</abbr> into a Latin American – and no longer just an Andean – MDB, as well as the admission of new
        members beyond the Andean Community from a diverse grouping of Latin American shareholders.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As per its revised Establishing Agreement, <abbr>CAF</abbr> promotes sustainable development and regional
        integration in the public and private sectors of <a class="item2"></a>shareholder countries through credit
        operations, non-reimbursable services, and support in the technical and financial structuring of projects.
        While reflective of the Articles of the RDBs and other SRDBs, <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s mandate to finance projects in
        all shareholder countries is unique – its project financing is not restricted to certain members and its
        geographical focus of operations includes its Latin American stakeholders and loans to banks in Spain and
        Portugal. This means <abbr>CAF</abbr> is a powerful example of a <abbr>DFI</abbr> challenging the traditional
        North-South model, indeed in this respect it is more innovative than the New Development Bank (<a class="item2"></a>NDB) and Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>AIIB</abbr>), which
        replicate the donor-recipient MDB model rather than the financial cooperative model.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>CAF</abbr> commenced operations in 1970 with five shareholder countries from the Andean region: Bolivia,
        Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela. The five founding members today control over 64% of voting power.
        Beginning in 1990, it gradually expanded its membership to include 12 other countries from Latin America and
        the Caribbean as well as Spain and Portugal. Of the non-founding members, Argentina – which joined in 2001 –
        controls the largest shareholding: 8.9%. In addition, 13 private commercial banks from the Latin American and
        Caribbean region are also shareholders, although collectively they control only 0.05% shareholding and are
        regarded as one shareholder. So, <abbr>CAF</abbr> expanded from five shareholders prior to 1990–20 in 2015. The
        expansion of membership not only enabled it to increase its capital base significantly – important to its
        dramatic growth in annual approvals over the 2000s and 2010s – but also to become better representative of
        Latin America and the Caribbean and not just the Andean Community; with the admission of Uruguay in 2001, all
        members of MERCOSUR are shareholders.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The shareholder expansion from 1990 was a practical necessity, since the <a class="item2"></a><abbr>CAF</abbr>
        commenced operations with little start-up capital – $25 million paid over several years – and, by ‘1981, the
        <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s finances were in a precarious state, with only US$15 million in loans committed that year’
        (Humphrey 2016, 104). After L. Enrique García Rodríguez became Executive President in 1991, the
        <abbr>CAF</abbr> underwent a significant restructuring to make it resemble more the corporate model of the
        World Bank and IADB, hiring consultants ‘from Coopers and Lybrand and a former World Bank vice president to
        review the <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s operations and make recommendations for overhauling internal process’ (Humphrey
        2016, 106), geared towards improve the MDB’s reputation and obtaining its first credit rating. This
        demonstrates the conditioning influence of global capital markets and credit ratings to the effective operation
        of MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>CAF</abbr> has tiered share types: ‘A’ shares are more influential in key issues such as corporate or
        capital structure changes, while ‘B’ and ‘C’ have less power and are represented by four directors of the 21.
        Despite the tiered structure, the <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s shareholding ‘gives all members representation on the
        Board and a strong influence on operations, as the Board votes by majority of members present (with no
        reference to capital contributions)’ (Humphrey 2015a, 9). Compared to other MDBs, the <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s
        shareholding structure allows the wealthy countries of Chile, Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela to supply higher
        levels of capital while still offering the poorer member countries ‘significant voting power’ (Humphrey 2016,
        103).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        An Executive President leads the <abbr>CAF</abbr> and it has only had two. From December 1991 to April 2017,
        Bolivian L. Enrique García Rodríguez led <abbr>CAF</abbr>, a very long tenure rare among the MDBs. The
        orientation of <abbr>CAF</abbr> as a Latin American MDB today is largely the consequence of García’s
        leadership, including several credit rating upgrades, expansion of country membership, and increasing annual
        approvals from $400 million in the early 1990s to over $12 billion annually since 2015 (García 2006). One of
        the final accomplishments of García’s presidency was a general capital increase of $4.5 billion in 2015; huge
        considering it commenced operations with just $25 million in total capital. Prior to the <abbr>CAF</abbr>,
        García worked for 17 years in the IADB, including serving as Treasurer. Peruvian Luis Carranza Ugarte succeeded
        García in April 2017. Ugarte is a renowned economist and has experience working in the IMF and was chief
        economist for Latin America and Emerging Markets of the <em class="calibre4">Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria</em>
        (<abbr>BBVA</abbr>) in Spain.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        During the 2010s, <abbr>CAF</abbr> came to exceed the World Bank’s Latin American annual commitments and rival
        those of the IADB. In 2017, the World Bank approved $5.9 billion to Latin America and the Caribbean and the
        IADB approved $13.4 billion, while the <abbr>CAF</abbr> approved $12.3 billion. To demonstrate the rapid
        expansion of <abbr>CAF</abbr> lending, consider the following: in 2000, <a class="item2"></a><abbr>CAF</abbr>
        approved $2.3 billion in new loans, in 2005, the figure was $4.8 billion, and, in 2010, it was $10.5 billion.
        Of $13.7 billion approved in 2018, the largest sectoral allocations were transport (27.3%), energy (23%), and
        publication administration (17.2%), demonstrating a more traditional infrastructural focus for the Bank. Such a
        rapid expansion in annual lending commitments while maintaining a strong capital base and expanding its credit
        rating is an achievement unmatched by the other MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s main <a class="item2"></a>lending instruments are medium- and long-term loans, credit
        lines, equity investments, syndicated loans, guarantees, trade finance, and grants. The focus on medium- to
        long-term rather than short- to medium-term loans is another sign of its strength, as smaller MDBs prefer
        instruments with quicker maturities. It provides technical assistance through its Fund for Technical
        Cooperation, which approved $30 million in 2016 representing 45% of annual advisory services. In contrast to
        other MDBs, <abbr>CAF</abbr>
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          loans are approved very rapidly, usually under three months, and face only two major review levels’ and the
          MDB itself ‘is highly decentralised, with local staff able to lead project development without needing to
          refer to HQ for many decisions.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (Humphrey 2015b, 17)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        While ‘this model of MDB is very attractive to many borrowers,’ there are trade-offs, including that ‘project
        quality has been questioned at times, with inadequate preparation and design leading to delays and problems
        during implementation’ (Humphrey 2015b, 17). Given the increasing size, scope, and therefore influence of
        <abbr>CAF</abbr>, problems of inadequate project quality will become more serious. Indeed, <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s
        credit rating was downgraded by S&amp;P Global Ratings (2019) to A+ with a negative outlook; it was the only
        MDB in 2019 with a negative outlook, though 2020 may see more join this category.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, <abbr>CAF</abbr> is an anomaly as a SRDB. The expansion of its <a class="item2"></a>shareholder
        membership, revision of mandate to address Latin American and not just Andean development issues, and
        considerable growth of its loan portfolio arguably has made the <abbr>CAF</abbr> resemble more an RDB over the
        2010s. Nonetheless, <abbr>CAF</abbr> is not without limitations. Ray and Kamal (2019, 194) conclude that it
        cannot be deemed a ‘potential substitute’ for the World Bank and RDBs yet, given that the more established MDBs
        ‘can boast decades of successful operations, the development of “knowledge banks” and the establishment and
        maintenance of global standards in environmentally and socially responsible lending.’ Instead, the
        <abbr>CAF</abbr> complements existing MDBs without yet replacing them.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.6 <a class="item6"></a>International Investment Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The IIB was proposed as an initiative to promote <a class="item2"></a>socialist economic integration between
        Soviet bloc countries and allies during the <a class="item2"></a>Cold War (Baran 1979/1980). It was associated
        with the <abbr>CMEA</abbr>, which facilitated multilateral economic interactions between members between 1949
        and 1991 (Stone 2008). The Soviet RDB was an attempt to build regional connections and economic and industrial
        growth and modernise member countries; as a Soviet alternative to the World Bank, it was a ‘hybrid of state
        socialism and capitalist finance’ (Stone 2008, 48). Its establishing agreement was signed on 10 July 1970 and
        it began operations on 1 January 1971.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IIB’s <a class="item2"></a>founding members were the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, People’s Republic of
        Hungary, German Democratic Republic, Mongolian Democratic Republic, People’s Republic of Poland, Czechoslovak
        Socialist Republic, and the USSR. Membership was expanded to include the Socialist Republic of Romania (1971),
        Cuba (1974), and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam (1977). Its original charter stated on paper that all member
        countries had ‘an equal voice in its decisions,’ while in practice ‘the Soviet Union’s overwhelming economic
        and political weight spurred the IIB’s other members to defer to it’ (Stone 2008, 61). During the Cold War, the
        IIB financed loans exceeding €7 billion, focussing on joint investment programmes.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        With the end of the Cold War, the relevance of the IIB was called into question; it lost its purpose and
        stagnated for two decades, comparable to the experiences of IBEC. The reunification of Germany and dissolution
        of Czechoslovakia led to their withdrawal in 1990 and 1993, with Poland following in 2000 as it sought to join
        the European Union (EU). Not only were member countries leaving but the IIB’s original purpose was to integrate
        socialist countries, a redundant task given that shareholders were transitioning from command- to market-based
        economies. Further, the IIB reflected the rigid economic flaws of the Soviet bloc. As Stone (2008, 48–9)
        comments at length,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          the IIB failed in its overall mission to invigorate the stagnating economies of the Soviet bloc. The reasons
          for its failure, intimately tied to the rigidities of the Soviet command economy, highlight the obstacles to
          reform of the late Soviet system. The bank’s efforts foundered not only because of the Soviet economy’s
          dependence on raw material exports but also, more profoundly, because of the Soviet Communist Party’s
          insistence on maintaining administratively determined prices, central planning, and tight links with the East
          European satellites. Those fundamental principles of the Soviet system constrained what the IIB could
          accomplish. From Moscow’s perspective, abandoning these core principles would mean abandoning the Soviet
          experiment altogether. In that sense, the IIB’s experience suggests that the late Soviet economic system was
          fundamentally not reformable.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        In 2012, new management took control of the stalled SRDB with a mandate from the remaining shareholders to
        start a complex reformation. The IIB’s <a class="item2"></a>2013–17 Strategy ‘was of marked anti-crisis
        nature,’ but the relaunch struggled due to financial, economic, and geopolitical shocks affecting its
        shareholders (IIB 2017, 4). Despite challenges, the IIB entered debt capital markets in 2014, the first time in
        its history, and began issuing bonds in Russia, Slovakia, and Romania. Its <a class="item2"></a>2018–22
        Development Strategy revised the mission of the MDB again, moving from providing loans on commercial principles
        to execute joint investment projects to ‘facilitating connectivity and integration between the economies of the
        Bank’s member states in order to ensure sustainable and inclusive growth, competitiveness of national
        economies, backed by the existing historical ties’ (IIB 2017, 5). As part of the Strategy, the IIB intends to
        build its capabilities and increase paid-in capital to expand annual financial commitments. In 2018, it signed
        a cooperation agreement with <abbr>CABEI</abbr> and became a member of the International Development Finance
        Club, which has five SRDBs as members perhaps with the aim of shoring up their legitimacy but also
        demonstrating that there are complex networks between the MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IIB’s shareholders today include EU and non-EU member countries, nine in total. The Russian Federation is
        the overall largest shareholder as well as the largest non-EU shareholder, controlling over 44% of voting
        power. Cuba, Vietnam, and Mongolia are the three other non-EU shareholders, collectively owning just over 1.6%.
        The five EU shareholders – Bulgaria, Hungary, Czech Republic, Romania, and Slovak Republic – together control
        nearly 48% voting power, with Bulgaria being the second overall largest shareholder holding 12.43%. With $2
        billion authorised capital, the paid-in capital of the nine countries was just above $400 million in 2020.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Since 1970, the IIB has been headquartered in Moscow, Russia. In 2019, however, its headquarters moved to
        Budapest, Hungary – a move designed to more effectively engage with EU and Western capital markets, a necessary
        precursor to the small SRDB expanding its influence; the <a class="item2"></a>credit rating agencies Fitch,
        Moody’s, and S&amp;P all responded favourably to the change. The relocation has not been without controversy,
        however, with tensions between shareholders. In addition to Hungarian taxpayers being responsible for the rent,
        refurbishing, and security of the new headquarters (as per the revised establishing agreement), diplomatic
        immunity means that the Hungarian state would not be able to enter the building without prior authorisation;
        the IIB is endowed with the capacity to bring non-EU persons into the EU without EU consent (Marianna and
        Zoltán 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IIB Council, comprised of <a class="item2"></a>member representatives, leads the IIB. It is managed by a
        Board, appointed by the Council. The current Chairperson of the Board is Nikolay Kosov, a Russian national,
        appointed in September 2012. Between 1977 and 1992, Kosov served in the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs and,
        between 1998 and 2007, was the First Deputy to the Chairperson of Vnesheconombank, a Russian state development
        corporation; Denis Ivanov, the incumbent IBEC Chairperson, served the same corporation. IIB Chairperson Kosov
        is supported by five Deputy Chairpersons and over 160 staff members.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The IIB primarily finances <a class="item2"></a>loans through national financial institutions, development
        banks, and export-import banks. It also co-finances projects with other MDBs and national financial
        institutions. In 2018, net projects approvals were largely for financial services (26%), power generation and
        transmission (24.1%), and rent and leasing (16.2%) (IIB 2018). Between 1970 and 2019, the IIB financed over 280
        investment projects totalling €9 billion. Given that the IIB financed $7 billion during its Cold War era, this
        demonstrates that the IIB has quickly rebuilt its portfolio since restructuring in 2012.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the IIB demonstrates the centrality of geopolitics to the <a class="item2"></a>role and functioning
        of MDBs. While all MDBs position themselves as financial institutions promoting economic growth through
        investments, they are also geopolitical actors representing the interests of their member countries. The IIB
        nearly dissolved during the 1990s and 2000s as its relevance in promoting socialist integration collapsed.
        Still, like most MDBs, it did not disappear, and it has been able to reinvent itself with strong leadership. It
        is now an active and interesting <abbr>DFI</abbr> worthy of further research.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.7 <a class="item6"></a><a class="item6"></a>West African Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        A study submitted to the WAMU Council of Ministers in December 1970 recommended that part of the income
        generated by the Central Bank of West African States (<abbr>BCEAO</abbr>), inaugurated in 1959, should be
        directed to initiatives promoting West African regional integration. During a March 1973 WAMU Council meeting,
        the chairperson responsible for reforming WAMU introduced a draft agreement for establishing a West African
        development bank. Like many MDBs, the agreement was signed quickly and on 14 November 1973 <abbr>BOAD</abbr>
        (in French: Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement) was founded, but it only became operational in 1976. When
        first established, it operated as the MDB of WAMU. On 1 August 1994, <abbr>BOAD</abbr> became a specialised and
        autonomous body of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), comparable to the <abbr>EADB</abbr>
        operating as the financial pillar of the <abbr>EAC</abbr>. Its current mission is to promote the balanced
        development of WAEMU <a class="item2"></a>member countries and contribute to the economic integration of West
        Africa, which mirrors the mission of other SRDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are several sub-regional organisations pursuing West African regional integration, a history dating back
        to French colonial rule (Quah 2016). After the <a class="item2"></a>Second World War, ‘former French colonies
        and France set up a monetary arrangement in the form of the <abbr>CFAF</abbr> zone. The <abbr>CFAF</abbr> zone
        comprises… countries grouped into two monetary unions, WAEMU and’ the Central African Economic and Monetary
        Community (<a class="item2"></a><abbr>CEMAC</abbr>) (Tsangarides and Qureshi 2008, 1262). The <abbr>CFAF</abbr>
        (in French: Communauté Financière d’Afrique Franc) is the currency issued by the <abbr>BCEAO</abbr>, with the
        West African Bank performing functions similar to a central bank since November 1962 (Bhatia 1985). While West
        Africa is like East Africa in that <a class="item2"></a>sub-regional organisations soon followed
        decolonisation, the region is unique due to the relationship maintained with its former colonial power, France
        (Ouedraogo 2013).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>BOAD</abbr> originally only had regional member countries, but today has 17 shareholders. From WAEMU,
        <abbr>BOAD</abbr>’s members are Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and
        Togo. The <abbr>BCEAO</abbr> is also a shareholder, demonstrating the <abbr>BOAD</abbr>’s position as part of a
        sub-regional arrangement. <a class="item2"></a>WAEMU members hold over 93% shareholding. The other shareholders
        are an eclectic mix of MDBs (the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and European Investment Bank (EIB)), national governments
        (France, Belgium, and Morocco), and the People’s Bank of China, Eximbank of India, German state-owned
        development bank KfW, together holding over 60% shareholding. The non-regional shareholders reveal the
        continued influence of former European colonial powers, notably France, since decolonisation, as well as the
        need for smaller Global South-led MDBs to build their capital and creditworthiness via the admission of
        wealthier non-regional countries and banks. When <abbr>BOAD</abbr>’s membership was restricted to regional
        members, it had limited capacity to raise funds on bond markets. But, since admitting non-regional
        shareholders, it has grown. In 2016, <abbr>BOAD</abbr> made one of the largest American dollar bond debuts of a
        West African organisation with a $750 million five-year trade, made possible by the inclusion of non- regional
        shareholders.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Christian Adovelande of Benin is <abbr>BOAD</abbr>’s incumbent President. Before taking office in February
        2011, he served as Vice President of Ecobank Transnational Incorporated Group (a pan-African regional banking
        group operating in West and Central Africa) between 2009 and 2011 and President of the EBID from 2002 to 2011;
        indeed, his resume reveals a <a class="item2"></a>leadership history in West African integration. As of
        December 2018, <abbr>BOAD</abbr> employed 295 employees, revealing it is a relatively small SRDB. President
        Adovelande was preceded by Abdoulaye Bio-Tchané of Benin from 2008 to 2010, who led the IMF’s African Division
        between 2002 and 2007, illustrating the common trend of senior staff movement between international
        organisations.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <abbr>BOAD</abbr> initially lent only to regional member governments but since 2002 it has provided loans
        to the private sector for development projects of regional significance, as well as lines of credit to small
        and medium enterprises (<a class="item2"></a>SMEs). In other words, it is following trends set by the World
        Bank. It has also funded debt-relief programmes on the basis that funds saved are diverted to health
        programmes, education, and infrastructure improvements. Between 1976 and 2018, it approved $8.82 billion
        through 1,149 operations. Annual approvals fluctuated from $500 to $900 million between 2008 and 2016 with an
        average of 40 operations approved each year. This reveals average loan sizes to be quite small for an MDB,
        between $10 and $20 million. In 2018, over 92% of financing was for direct loans, with the remaining 8% for
        refinancing and equity investments, and there was a 58% to 42% split between non-commercial and commercial
        loans.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In promoting regional integration and solidarity, the <abbr>BOAD</abbr> focusses on three priorities:
        infrastructure (communications, hydraulic equipment, and electricity), rural and industrial sector productive
        improvements, and project preparation studies. In 2016, its strategic areas included accelerating regional
        integration through sustained infrastructure financing, support for inclusive growth, food security, and
        sustainable development, and support for businesses and governments (<abbr>BOAD</abbr> 2016).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the <abbr>BOAD</abbr> is embedded within a larger sub-regional architecture and, while this is
        common among SRDBs, few of those systems are still functioning; West Africa is the positive exception. Despite
        being small in size, it has played an influential role in promoting West African regional integration
        (Ouedraogo 2013). Its size and scope are not insubstantial when understood as relative to its region and the
        2016 US dollar bond debut revealed it to be a leading financial organisation in West Africa. Still like many of
        the other small MDBs, the <abbr>BOAD</abbr> has suffered from personnel constraints, issues related to borrower
        creditworthiness, and project problems like a long lag-time between project assignment and implementation.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.8 <a class="item6"></a>FONPLATA Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The River Plate Basin Treaty dates to the February 1967 Joint Declaration of Buenos Aires, when the five River
        Plate countries – Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay – proposed to better coordinate their
        regional interactions. In April 1969, the Treaty was formalised with the overarching purpose of organising
        studies, programmes, and works to better manage water resources, industries, and financial actions along shared
        borders and areas of common interest. The <a class="item2"></a>Plate Basin Financial Development Fund was
        established by the <a class="item2"></a>River Plate countries on 12 June 1974 when its Articles of Agreement
        were signed; the Articles entered into force on 14 October 1976 and the Fund commenced operations in 1977,
        becoming the third Latin American SRDB after the <abbr>CABEI</abbr> and <abbr>CAF</abbr>. An extension of the
        <a class="item2"></a>River Plate Basin Treaty, the Fund served sub-regional integration, acting as the Treaty’s
        financial mechanism (Ocampo and Titelman 2009, 2012).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In November 2018, the Fund renamed itself the FONPLATA Development Bank through revisions to its Constitutive
        Agreement, which were an attempt to better reflect its growth into a fully fledged MDB over the 2010s. This
        growth was achieved by creating the office of <a class="item2"></a>Executive President in 2010, significantly
        increasing subscribed capital in 2013 and 2016, and quadrupling annual loan approvals. Over its history, the
        World Bank, IADB, and <abbr>CAF</abbr> have co-financed Fund projects (Ocampo and Titelman 2009) and, during
        the 2010s, it explored new relationships, including signing a memorandum of strategic cooperation with the NDB
        in April 2017 (Shelepov and Andronova 2018). In addition, while previously regarded as among the ‘less
        transparent funding bodies’ (Pieck 2011, 195), it has recently followed more established MDBs in creating
        robust transparency and accountability mechanisms. The FONPLATA Bank of the 2010s is a stable and influential
        MDB, whereas previously it operated as an opaque funding window.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As per its new Constitutive Agreement, the ‘purpose of FONPLATA shall be to support the integration and
        harmonious and inclusive development of the member countries for their better integration within the region and
        the global market by <a class="item2"></a>funding studies, projects, programs, assistance, and technical
        advice’ (FONPLATA 2018b). Broadly reflecting the mandates of other SRDBs, it is unique in stating that its
        purpose is both regional and global market integration.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        FONPLATA has five member countries. The two largest shareholders are Argentina and Brazil, with 33.3% voting
        power each, followed by Bolivia, Paraguay, and Uruguay with 11.1% each. The SRDB is thus wholly owned by
        borrowing member countries (Humphrey 2019). Despite this, its <a class="item2"></a>Constitutive Agreement
        allows non-founding members and agencies to join, although none have so far. With a stable A- credit rating and
        $3 billion authorised capital, it is uncertain what additional shareholders could offer the SRDB, as well as
        what the MDB could offer new entrants, a dilemma reflected in the current membership of the NDB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Juan E. Notaro Fraga is FONPLATA’s incumbent Executive President. A Uruguayan economist and agricultural
        engineer, Notaro was elected in 2012 and re-elected in 2017; he will vacate office in 2022, as per term limits.
        Prior to his appointment, Notaro was Deputy Secretary of the IADB from 2008 to 2012 and before that Executive
        Director for Uruguay on the Boards of Directors of the World Bank and IADB. Uncharacteristically for an MDB,
        the position of Executive President was only created in 2010, with Fotaro being the first appointee; the
        creation of the presidency was an attempt to revitalise the SRDB. In a June 2019 editorial, Notaro (2019)
        detailed key issues affecting the River Plate Basin, including the population doubling since the 1970s and
        challenges related to literacy, infant mortality, poverty, and economic growth, commenting that FONPLATA,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          with its renewed strategy and the support of its member countries, is focused on becoming increasingly
          important by supporting the development agendas of our countries. In the last six years, we have approved
          more projects than in the previous 39 years, totalling a higher amount than all funding granted by this
          institution since 1974. We have also formed alliances with other development banks and opened our institution
          to new partners.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        This statement highlights that the SRDB is following standard banking norms to renew its legitimacy in a
        crowded field of public and private development finance, through specialisation as an MDB focussed on
        sub-regional integration.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        FONPLATA’s first <a class="item2"></a>capital replenishment was approved in 2013, which more than doubled its
        authorised capital to $1.2 billion; it commenced operations with $160 million in initial contributions and in
        2006 had $415 million in authorised capital (Ocampo and Titelman 2009). A second capital replenishment approved
        in 2016 increased its authorised capital to $3 billion, six times what was available in 2012, and paid-in
        capital was a high $866 million in 2019. The growth in capital led to a corresponding increase in annual
        approvals, from an average of $50 million prior to 2012 to $425 million in 2018.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 2012 and 2018, it approved $1.9 billion in new loans, more than double the amount approved from when it
        commenced operations (FONPLATA 2018a). Still, the average size of loans remained relatively static. To
        illustrate, $94.8 million in new loans was approved in 2013, with significant increases in 2016 ($315.7
        million) and 2018 ($415.1 million), whereas average loans size remained between $25 and $32 million. This
        suggests that the number of loans approved annually increased significantly. Also, despite increasing loan
        numbers, sectoral priorities remained stable; for much of the 2010s, logistics and transportation accounted for
        63% of new loans (FONPLATA 2018a, 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As part of the 2013 and 2016 capital replenishments, FONPLATA’s operational strategy shifted to focus on four
        development axes: national and regional integration, with an emphasis on border areas; improving the
        competitiveness of productive sectors; building co-financing arrangements with other development institutions;
        and, promoting social and economic infrastructure (FONPLATA 2019). This operational strategy reveals the SRDB
        to be a project-based investment bank prioritising regional integration through infrastructural development.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, FONPLATA’s growth during the 2010s resembles <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s, albeit remaining a much smaller
        SRDB. Through organisational restructuring and an expansion of its capital base, as well as myriad other
        reforms, the River Plate SRDB grew from a small <a class="item2"></a>funding window to an influential MDB. This
        demonstrates the potential influence of the smaller MDBs, given requisite support and strong leadership, a
        recurring trend emerging from the case studies in this chapter.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.9 <a class="item6"></a>ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development</h2>

      <div class="item">
        EBID is the financial arm of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It was originally
        established in 1975 as the Fund for Cooperation, Compensation, and Development of the Economic Community of
        West African States (ECOWAS Fund) and commenced operations in 1979. In January 2004, the Fund was reorganised
        into EBID, which created two specialised agencies: the ECOWAS Regional Development Fund (ERDF) for financing
        public sector projects and the ECOWAS Regional Investment Bank (ERIB) for financing private sector projects. In
        June 2006, a further restructuring was approved merging <a class="item2"></a>ERDF and <a class="item2"></a>ERIB
        into a single organisation, so EBID has operated in its current form since January 2007. Despite the complex
        history of reorganisation and restructuring, EBID has many traits of the other SRDBs, including a growing
        significance as a sub-regional intermediary over the past two decades, a focus on public and private
        investment, and adaptation to mitigate limited capital availability and a poor credit rating.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The objective of EBID is to approve loans and guarantees for investment projects and programmes for the
        economic and social development of member states, mobilise resources inside and outside ECOWAS, provide
        technical assistance, and manage ECOWAS resources and special funds (EBID 2020). These objectives are very
        similar to the RDBs and other SRDBs and recognise that it operates as the financial arm of a formal
        sub-regional organisation.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are three notable sub-regional organisations operating in West Africa: ECOWAS, WAEMU, and the West
        African Monetary Zone (WAMZ). Tsangarides and Qureshi (2008, 1274) identify that in addition to problematic
        overlap and resource duplication between the three sub-regional organisations, there are ‘considerable
        dissimilarities in the economic characteristics of the countries in West Africa, leading to difficulties in
        intra-regional coordination between member countries.’ ECOWAS was founded in 1975 in Lagos, Nigeria, and today
        has 15 member countries, eight of which are also members of WAEMU and five non-WAEMU members of ECOWAS are part
        of WAMZ (Robert 2004, Tsangarides and Qureshi 2008). When first established, ECOWAS’ objective was ‘to promote
        economic cooperation and integration among West African states through monetary and economic union’ (Gupta
        2015, 5). After a push in the mid-1980s to boost investments in industrial enterprises and other areas, the
        ECOWAS Treaty was revised in July 1993, an attempt to further formalise the sub-regional grouping and
        accelerate integration; the ‘revised document was far more detailed than its predecessor and clearly listed the
        powers of officials. More than just a statement, it was a descriptive and regulating treaty’ (Gupta 2015, 8).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Nigeria was the driving force behind the economic and political expansion of ECOWAS and proposed sending
        soldiers under the authority of the sub-regional organisation to restore peace in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and
        Guinea Bissau (Yabi 2010). The influence of Nigeria over ECOWAS is large, even if it is not always successful
        in its political manoeuvres (Momodu 2018). Given a population ‘estimated to be 300 million in 2015,
        representing 35% of the total population of sub- Saharan Africa’ (Aglina, Agbejule, and Nyamuame 2016, 333),
        and three quarters of its member countries ‘identified among the world’s least developed countries’ (Robert
        2004, 5), ECOWAS is not an insignificant institutional arrangement and EBID is its financial arm.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EBID has 15 member countries. The largest shareholder by far is Nigeria, with 31.34% shareholding, followed
        by Ghana (15.71%) and Côte d’Ivoire (14.76%). Together, these three member countries hold almost 62%
        shareholding, meaning they effectively control the SRDB. The remaining shareholders hold from just over 6% (as
        in the case of Liberia) to less than 1% (as held by Cabo Verde). While entirely controlled by borrowing member
        states, there is great disparity in corporate influence. In 2016, EBID’s Board representation was divided into
        an ECOWAS Commission Observer and individual representatives for Nigeria, Ghana, and Côte d’Ivoire, while the
        remaining countries were clustered into Group I, II, and III representative groups with four countries
        represented in each group.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Following the June 2006 reorganisation of its current structure, EBID doubled its authorised capital from $800
        million to $1.5 billion in 2011, enabling it to expand its lending operations – still, this is half of FONPLATA
        with a much larger population covered. Despite the capital increase, however, EBID had not received an
        <a class="item2"></a>international credit rating until 2018 when Moody’s (2018) assigned a first-time foreign
        currency issuer rating, allocating the SRDB a B+ credit rating with a negative outlook.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        EBID’s incumbent President is Ghanaian Dr. George Agyekum Nana Donkor, who took office in February 2020. Prior
        to his appointment, President Donkor served as EBID Vice <a class="item2"></a>President of Finance,
        Administration, and Corporate Services for several years. He was preceded by Nigerian Bashir Mamman Ifo
        (2011–20), who held several senior positions in EBID from 1995, including Acting Managing Director of ERIB.
        These two appointments suggest a recent preference for internal promotion as opposed to external recruitment.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In 2017, EBID approved 12 projects for $141.8 million, nine of which were private sector loans and the
        remaining three public sector. <a class="item2"></a>Infrastructure is the largest sector financed by the SRDB,
        with it having ‘contributed to the funding of most of the West African highway network, linking Nouakchott in
        Mauritania and Lagos in Nigeria, and linking Dakar in Senegal and N’Djamena in Chad, providing the
        interconnecting roads between the two highways’ (EBID 2008, 8). Between 1979 and 2017, it approved 266 projects
        totalling $2.33 billion, revealing it to be a small SRDB comparable to the <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>, with both
        originally established in 1975, currently comprised of 12–15 member countries, and $2 billion or less in
        authorised capital. Eligibility to receive financial assistance requires the applicant to be an ECOWAS member
        and its largest borrowers (in order) are Benin, Senegal, Togo, Mali, and Guinea.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, EBID follows the trend of several other SRDBs in acting as the financial arm of a sub-regional
        organisation. It was a minor MDB for many decades due to shareholder conflict and limited access to capital
        markets. Like many other SRDBs, however, economic growth in its region has renewed its relevance.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.10 <a class="item6"></a>Development Bank of Central African States</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> (in French: <em class="calibre4">Banque de Développement des États de l’Afrique Centrale</em>) is a small
        SRDB operating in Central Africa, comparable to EBID. It was established through an agreement signed in
        December 1975 and commenced operations in January 1977. The SRDB finances <a class="item2"></a>development
        projects in <abbr>CEMAC</abbr> member states and prioritises regional integration, transport and energy
        infrastructure, and education, health, and social development. Given its position as a leading Central African
        financial organisation, it has close relations with the Bank of Central African States (<abbr>BEAC</abbr>),
        which is a leading <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> shareholder. The <abbr>BEAC</abbr> was founded in 1972, its official
        currency is the Central African <abbr>CFAF</abbr>, and its responsibilities include conducting
        <abbr>CEMAC</abbr> monetary and exchange rate policy. A 2019 audit by the Central African Banking Commission
        (<abbr>COBAC</abbr>) revealed concerns about <abbr>BEAC</abbr>’s large exposure to <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> and
        recommended that the central bank refrain from providing additional financing to the SRDB until substantive
        reforms were implemented (IMF 2019). This demonstrates concerns about the financial health of the Central
        African community.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The Central African SRDB’s shareholders are diverse. There are six <a class="item2"></a>regional member states
        – Cameroon, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, Gabon, Chad, and Equatorial Guinea – that each hold
        8.48% voting share, totalling close to 51%. Like the West African SRDBs, <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>’s regional members
        are francophone African states. The <abbr>BEAC</abbr> is also a regional shareholder, holding 33.43% voting
        power, which means that <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> is largely owned by a sub-regional central bank, which is rare for
        an MDB and reveals that <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> is part of a larger sub-regional grouping. In addition,
        <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> has five non-regional shareholders: the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and the governments of France,
        Kuwait, Libya, and Morocco. The non-regional members hold around 2% shareholding collectively. Unusual for an
        MDB, 14% of shares are not yet subscribed.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <a class="item2"></a>Chairperson of the Board of Directors leads <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>. The incumbent
        Chairperson is Fortunato Ofa Mbo Nchama of Equatorial Guinea who took office in March 2017 and who previously
        served as the Second Deputy Secretary of the Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea. His predecessor was Abbas
        Mahamat Tolli of Chad, who assumed office in 2015 but left two years later to become <abbr>BEAC</abbr>
        Governor. Tolli had the difficult task of restoring <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>’s reputation in the aftermath of his
        predecessor Michaël Adandé’s turbulent tenure. Adandé became Chairperson in 2011 and led the MDB into
        significant failures and personal scandal, calling into question <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>’s capacity to operate. In
        2014 and 2015, two successive bond issues totalling €107 million by Adandé failed to meet their targets,
        damaging <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>’s fragile reputation. After these failures, Adandé dismissed the financial
        management team, two days before it was announced that the Board had asked him to resign (Mbadi 2015). In
        addition, Adandé had public conflict with <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> Vice President André Nzapayéké, ‘with reciprocal
        accusations of mismanagement, the two men no longer speak to each other and criticise each other’ (Soudan
        2013). While the larger MDBs have not been without scandal, such problems can severely undermine smaller SRDBs.
        Ben-Artzi (2016) argued that MDBs need one key shareholder that takes a key interest in operations to ensure
        they are well governed. In <abbr>BDEAC</abbr>’s case, however, <abbr>BEAC</abbr> – as its largest shareholder –
        has also been mired in corruption scandals, including in 2010 when ‘top-ranking Gabonese officials in the
        <abbr>BEAC</abbr> were found to have embezzled millions, giving much of the money to members of France’s two
        main political parties’ (Ryan 2010); they were said to have embezzled $36 million over a five-year period.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1977 and 2017, <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> approved 194 loans totalling $1.8 billion, as well as 44 studies and
        four equity investments (<abbr>BDEAC</abbr> 2018). It is a small MDB in terms of annual approvals, reflecting
        its small borrowing membership and capital base. <abbr>BOAD</abbr>, which is similar in size, structure, and
        membership, has been far more effective – <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> financed 170 projects between 1976 and 2013 while
        <abbr>BOAD</abbr> approved 697 over the same period (Mbadi 2015). In 2016, <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> approved five
        lending operations – four projects and one renewal of guarantee, totalling $185 million, disbursed as
        agriculture, transportation, and agro-industry investments. In 2017, most lending operations in progress were
        BBB to CCC credit rated, with only a couple reaching A- and some D rated; this demonstrates the loan portfolio
        to be vulnerable, making it difficult for the MDB itself to acquire a <a class="item2"></a>credit rating.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> demonstrates the difficulties smaller SRDBs can face when operating in low
        resource environments, including problems of leadership and financial stability and credibility. While other
        SRDBs have been able to address such difficulties and improve their standing, <abbr>BDEAC</abbr> remains
        troubled.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.11 <a class="item6"></a>Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The PTA Bank was formed in November 1985 following the 1981 <a class="item2"></a>Treaty Establishing the
        Preferential Trade Area (PTA), which became the <abbr>COMESA</abbr> in December 1994. It is the first of a
        sub-set of SRDBs that focus on trade finance as much as (and sometimes more than) development and regional
        integration. Trade finance, with short maturities assisting profitability, offers small SRDBs a useful niche.
        As <abbr>COMESA</abbr>’s financial arm, the SRDB operated under its legal name – the Eastern and Southern Trade
        and Development Bank – and had two trading names: the PTA Bank in English and <em class="calibre4">Banque de la ZEP</em> in
        French. A ‘modest’ SRDB for its first two decades, by 1999 it ‘had a small portfolio, a very high stock of
        <a class="item2"></a>non-performing loans… and substantial difficulties in finding projects to fund due to the
        moribund state of regional trade and lack of interest by borrowers’ (Humphrey 2019, 169). After 2000, however,
        it began to institute organisational reforms, expand membership to include additional regional as well as
        non-regional members, and rally its credit rating. In May 2016, the SRDB’s Board of Governors approved
        rebranding the MDB as the TDB and developed a new logo, which became effective in 2017; the name change, as
        with <abbr>CAF</abbr>, can be interpreted as a ‘soft reboot’ to reflect new priorities. The TDB is today the
        second largest MDB operating in Africa behind the <abbr>AfDB</abbr> and the largest borrower-led ‘minilateral
        development bank’ (Humphrey 2019, 166).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The TDB’s current <a class="item2"></a>mission is to ‘be at the forefront of extending reliable financial &amp;
        non-financial services to advance trade, development, and regional economic integration through
        customer-focused and innovative instruments’ (TDB 2018, ix). The focus on regional integration is comparable to
        the RDBs and other SRDBs, while the prioritisation on innovative financial instruments reflects the World Bank
        agenda but is notable given that it remains a small SRDB with an uncertain capital base and credit rating.
        Indeed, the TDB has long struggled to strengthen its credit rating, given the major shareholders providing its
        callable capital have low ratings with many dependent on foreign aid to support their foreign currency needs
        (Humphrey 2019, 171–2).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Membership in TDB is open to <abbr>COMESA</abbr> and non-<abbr>COMESA</abbr> countries, non-regional countries,
        and institutional and banking shareholders. When it first commenced operations, it had nine regional members,
        whereas today it has 36 shareholders: 22 regional, two non-regional, and 12 institutional members. With
        membership expanding since 2000, it added several regional members in the mid-2010s, most recently Madagascar
        in 2018. The <a class="item2"></a>non-regional members are the National Bank of Belarus and People’s Bank of
        China, the latter joining in 2000. The institutional members are a diverse mix of banking and financial
        institutions, including the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa
        (<abbr>BADEA</abbr>), and OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), as well as African insurance,
        pension, and social security funds. Humphrey (2019, 175) argues that the expansion of <a class="item2"></a>membership was
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          (1) to strengthen the bank’s capital base and hence lending capacity; (2) to bring in new borrowing countries
          to diversify and de-risk the loan portfolio; and (3) to bring in shareholders with higher sovereign ratings
          to strengthen TDB’s own credit rating.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        TDB’s capital stock subscriptions are divided into Class A and Class B shares. Class A shares are owned by
        regional member countries and the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, while Class B shares are owned by non-regional and
        institutional members, as well as the <abbr>AfDB</abbr>, which holds shares in both classes. Class A shares
        have a par value of $22,667 and Class B $4,533.40. In 2018, Class A authorised capital was $2 billion, Class B
        was $1 billion, and paid-up capital was $357 million (Class A) and $105 million (Class B). The largest Class A
        shareholders are Egypt, Ethiopia, and Kenya holding 8.61% each, while China is the largest Class B shareholder
        with 15.39%. The two classes were the consequence of share structure reforms enacted in December 2012, designed
        to draw in new capital. As a result, Humphrey (2019, 169) argues,
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          no member even comes close to veto power in the boards of governors or directors, which generally require a
          simple majority – or, in special cases, a two-thirds majority – for decision-making. This has led to a
          relatively harmonious environment on the boards where, according to senior management, most issues are
          decided by consensus.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Adamassu Tadesse of Ethiopia is the current TDB President, assuming office in April 2012. Building on the
        legacy of his predecessor Michael Gondwe of Zambia who began the expansion of membership and escalation of
        annual trade finance approvals as well as reducing <a class="item2"></a>non-performing loans from over 20% in
        2005 to 5% when he left office (Humphrey 2019, 179), President Tadesse further reformed TDB’s organisation and
        operations. In recognition of his achievements, Tadesse was awarded the 2019 African Banker of the Year Award
        at the African Banker Awards. Tadesse’s achievements include growing equity capital and annual profits
        four-fold and assets five-fold between 2012 and 2019 and, in 2017, TDB received its first investment grade
        ratings from Moody’s and Global Credit Ratings, Africa’s largest ratings agency. In addition, TDB attracted 15
        new shareholders, both regional countries and pension and insurance funds. As Tadesse comments, ‘It is fair to
        say the Bank has shot out the lights in terms of its strategy and corporate plan targets’ (cited in Africa
        Fintech Summit 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        TDB provides two main lending instruments. First, Project and Infrastructure Finance, a long-term lending
        window that finances projects with a tenor of up to 15 years and, second, Trade Finance, a short-term lending
        window financing projects up to three years. Over the past two decades, Trade Finance has by far become the
        lead lending stream. <a class="item2"></a>Project and Infrastructure Finance grew from $176 million in annual
        approvals in 2008 to $323 million in 2016. In contrast, Trade Finance grew from $118 million in 2006 to $3.27
        billion in 2012 and has maintained an annual average of over $3 billion since 2012. Humphrey (2019) argues that
        the expansion of Trade Finance is because it is safer than project finance in terms of repayment and it is
        easier to structure transactions. <a class="item2"></a>Trade Finance also capitalises on TDB’s new
        relationships with commercial banks in OECD countries. This innovation in lending is indicative of the most
        successful SRDBs, particularly those with lower credit ratings and capital bases.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the expansion of TDB during the 2010s resembles that of <abbr>CAF</abbr>, although the Latin
        American SRDB is greater in size and influence. Both saw a considerable <a class="item2"></a>expansion in
        membership, growth in annual approvals, and development in regional stature to rival the more established RDBs
        in their regions, although TDB lags behind <abbr>AfDB</abbr> while <abbr>CAF</abbr>’s lending trajectory may
        lead it to outperform IADB over the coming decade. Still, TDB is a model of what small a SRBD in Africa can
        achieve with the right membership and leadership.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.12 <a class="item6"></a>Pacific Islands Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The PIDB was established in July 1989 by the Association of Pacific Island Legislatures, following a proposal
        to create a Pacific Islands MDB unanimously endorsed by the Association in May 1987. The Association and hence
        the SRDB represent most US associated states in the Micronesian region of the Pacific worried that the US was
        going to end aid (Mak and Naya 1994). Notably, it does not cover any of the Polynesian or Melanesian Pacific
        Island states. PIDB was founded to address insufficient financial assistance to the region from existing MDBs
        and private investors and to specialise in addressing the needs and challenges of the Pacific Islands.
        Mirroring other SRDBs, the ‘mission and purpose of the Bank is to contribute to the acceleration of the process
        of economic and social development of the member states and nation, individually and collectively, and to
        promote economic cooperation among them’ (PIDB 2019b).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The SRDB is wholly owned by nine <a class="item2"></a>Micronesian borrowing members: Marshall Islands (21.41%),
        Yap (15.47%), Pohnpei (13.97%), Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (10.75%), Guam (10.75%), Palau
        (10.75%), Kosrae (8.81%), Kwajalein Atoll (5.37%), and Chuuk (2.71%). Its shareholders do not include all
        Association members; Hawaii, Nauru, and Kiribati are not part of the PIDB. While regional membership ensures a
        ‘Pacific Islands identity,’ the shareholding includes many of world’s least developed countries that suffer
        problems associated with small island developing states (Tisdell 2002). This is reflected in the SRDB’s
        relatively microscopic capital of $9.3 million, which limits the PIDB’s reach and impact. It is by a far margin
        the smallest MDB in terms of capital structure and annual loan approvals.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A Board of Governors, Board of Executive Directors, and senior management govern PIDB, like the other MDBs.
        Each shareholder appoints two representatives to the Board of Governors, with most responsibility delegated to
        the nine-member <a class="item2"></a>Board of Directors. The PIDB President manages day-to-day operations
        supported by managers of administration and of loans, both of whom are appointed by the President and
        respectively oversee corporate administration and the lending portfolio. The incumbent President is Christopher
        A. Cruz, who assumed office on 16 December 2019. He succeeded Aren Palik, who led PIDB for two decades.
        President Cruz previously worked in the Bank of Guam, beginning as a management trainee in 2007 before being
        promoted to credit officer in 2008. In 2012, he was promoted to assistant vice president and branch manager of
        the Bank of Guam’s Pohnpei branch, before being promoted to vice president and relationship banking manager in
        2014, a post he held until joining the PIDB as president. Cruz’s professional resume is a notable exception
        from other MDB presidents, who mostly come from political or senior government roles or from senior roles in
        large commercial banks.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The PIDB is a unique MDB in that it approves residential home and consumer loans, as well as <a class="item2"></a>private sector commercial loans. While consumer loans are small in financial amount (usually
        $500–$25,000), they are the bulk of its portfolio. In 2013, 93 of 129 approved projects were consumer loans,
        totalling just over $1 million of the $4.8 million commitments that year (PIDB 2014). Commercial loans are the
        largest loans approved in size, with 69% of loans approved in 2016 being commercial loans (PIDB 2017). The
        minimum commercial loan size is $20,000, with the maximum determined by equity capital allocated by country. In
        2016, outstanding loans by sector divided into commercial loans ($8 million), residential home loans ($2.3
        million), and consumer loans ($1.34 million). The year 2018 saw a large increase in new loans: 67 loans
        totalling $6.6 million. This is considerably larger than the 38 loans totalling $2.9 million approved in 2017
        (PIDB 2019a). The difference between the two years derives from a doubling of residential home loans (in number
        and total financing amount), as well as an increase in commercial tourism loans from $9,000 to $3.4 million,
        which may turn out to be a problem for the PIDB given the impact of COVID-19 on tourism.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the PIDB is a very small SRDB, with significant <a class="item2"></a>resource and geographical
        limitations. Despite these challenges, it is an important organisation for member states that, like other
        Pacific Islands and small island developing states more generally, are poorly represented in MDBs, both in
        terms of shareholding and annual lending allocations. The PIDB is also a good illustration of the innovation
        often demonstrated in other SRDBs in response to the needs of their region; in this case, providing consumer
        and residential loans. In 1994, Mak and Naya (1994, 40) commented that the:
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          constraint on the development of the Pacific Islands is not funding alone but lies in each country’s
          (in)ability to use aid efficiently, promote private sector development, implement appropriate policy reforms,
          [and] develop human resources to build the capacity for policy analysis and development management.’
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        There is some truth in this. However, it also demonstrates a major limitation of MDBs; they are based on the
        idea that capitalist-led development is the only path and the limits of this view become clear when looking at
        sustainable paths for most small island developing nations.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.13 <a class="item6"></a>Black Sea Trade and Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> was established by the 11 member countries of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
        (<abbr>BSEC</abbr>) sub-regional community as <abbr>BSEC</abbr>’s financial pillar. Its Establishing Agreement
        was signed in 1994 and entered into force in 1997. The SRDB commenced operations in June 1999. Both
        <abbr>BSEC</abbr> and <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> are post-Cold War entities, emerging from attempts to build economic
        and political connections while avoiding regional antagonisms during post-Soviet transition (Manoli 2013).
        Following the collapse of the Soviet bloc, many Black Sea countries
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          found themselves in an unprecedented situation to the extent that their existing economic structures became
          inappropriate virtually overnight for the open and competitive business environment to which they were now
          exposed. This has constituted a challenge for the Black Sea region, while at the same time providing it with
          ample opportunities to become part of an economically integrated global playing field.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (Imre 2006, 243)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        As per the <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>’s (2011) Establishing Agreement, its purpose is
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          to effectively contribute to the transition process of the Member States towards the economic prosperity of
          the people of the region and to finance and promote regional projects and provide other banking services to
          projects of the public and private sectors in the Member States and trade activities among the Member States.
        </div>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        Thus, it reflects the SRDBs and SRDBs in promoting regional integration, but the language also suggests a
        commercial bank focus, like the IIB and EDB.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        <abbr>BSEC</abbr> was created with the signing of the <a class="item2"></a>Istanbul Summit Declaration and
        Bosphorus Statement in June 1992 and its Charter entered into force on 1 May 1999, one month before the
        <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> began operations. In addition to the <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>, <abbr>BSEC</abbr> has developed
        other sub-regional bodies, including its Parliamentary Assembly, Business Council, and International Centre for
        Black Sea Studies. Despite this, <abbr>BSEC</abbr> is an ‘unassertive’ sub-regional body and does not
      </div>

      <blockquote class="item13">
        <div class="quote">
          seem to be actively tackling the key problems for its aims, neither has it built up its own capacity for
          action, increased the coherence or unity among the <abbr>BSEC</abbr> family, or given substance to the idea
          of Black Sea integration.
        </div>

        <footer class="item14">
          (Hajizada 2014, 117)
        </footer>
      </blockquote>

      <div class="item">
        This is problematic given regional conflicts, ongoing economic crises, political instability in Ukraine, and
        the Russian annexation of Crimea (Vladova and Knieling 2014) but perhaps also reflects these constraints.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are 11 <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> shareholders, including EU and non-EU member countries (Imre 2006). Russia,
        Turkey, and Greece are the largest shareholders, each holding 16.6% of voting power, followed by Romania
        (14.1%) and Bulgaria and Ukraine (13.6% each). The remaining <a class="item2"></a>shareholders – Azerbaijan,
        Albania, Armenia, Georgia, and Moldova – collectively hold the residual capital share. In addition,
        <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> has a dozen observer institutions that can attend and communicate in annual meetings and are
        involved in loan co-financing. These institutions include the <abbr>AsDB</abbr>, EBRD, EIB, IFC, IIB, and NIB,
        as well as national development banks such as the Development Bank of Austria and Russian Development Bank.
        Many of these observers hold AAA credit ratings, which is beneficial to <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> when approving
        co-financed loans. It also demonstrates that <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> has been very active in building networks with
        other MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Notably, while <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>’s <a class="item2"></a>authorised capital remained the same between 2008 and
        2019 (€3.45 billion), the proportion of subscribed, callable, and paid-in capital increased. In 2008,
        subscribed capital was €1.1 billion, callable capital was €805 million, and paid-in capital €345 million. By
        2019, subscribed capital increased to €2.29 billion, callable to €1.6 billion, and paid-in to €687 million. As
        a result, its financial standing improved over the 2010s, with the capital increases coinciding with its credit
        rating rallying from BBB+ to A-.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Six Presidents have led the <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>, all of whom have served single four-year terms. All Presidents
        have been either Turkish or Russian, suggesting that Turkey and Russia are the leading influencers in the SRDB,
        despite Greece holding equal shareholding. This is reinforced by the fact that Turkey and Russia have been the
        two largest recipients of <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> financial assistance, receiving over 22% and 18% respectively
        between 1999 and 2018.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 1999 and 2009, <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> financed 161 operations in its member countries totalling $2 billion.
        In contrast, between 2009 and 2018, it financed 238 operations totalling over $3.8 billion. This demonstrates
        not only an increase in operations but an increase in the average size of approved projects. Between 1999 and
        2018, the financial sector cumulatively received the largest percentage of loan approvals (42.8%), revealing
        <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>’s persona as a ‘commercial’ MDB. Its products and services include short- and long-term
        loans, trade finance, credit lines to SMEs, equity investments, guarantees, and co-financing.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> greatly resembles the IIB and EDB, all three of which are greatly influenced by
        Russia. The main similarities between the three SRDBs are that they are a mix between a commercial bank and an
        MDB and they are post-Soviet regional integration initiatives.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.14 <a class="item6"></a>ECO Trade and Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        The Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO) is a formal regional body founded by Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey in
        1985. It is the successor to the Regional Cooperation for Development that operated from 1964 to 1979, which
        ceased to function following the 1979 <a class="item2"></a>Iranian Revolution. Despite being established in
        1985, ECO was non-functional until 1991, when its foundational treaty was altered, leading it to become a fully
        fledged organisation. In 1992, following the end of the <a class="item2"></a>Cold War and dissolution of the
        Soviet Union, ECO admitted several new members, including Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
        Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan (Javaid and Siahmardy 2017); there are now ten ECO member countries.
        An important aspect of ECO has been the gradual dismantling of tariff barriers ‘to promote intra-regional trade
        and gradual integration of the region with global markets’ (Ali and Khalid 2015, 14033). After the 1992
        expansion of membership, the founding ECO members – Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey – signed Articles of Agreement
        to establish the ETDB in March 1995. However, it would not be until August 2005 that the Articles were
        ratified. The ETDB commenced operations in 2008.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        As per the ETDB’s (2005) <a class="item2"></a>Articles of Agreement, the ‘Bank shall mobilise resources for the
        purposes of initiating, promoting, and providing financial facilities to expand intra-regional trade and
        accelerate <a class="item2"></a>economic development of ECO member countries.’ These purposes are pursued
        through project financing, cooperation with other financial institutions, special funds, and related banking
        activities. It is notable that technical assistance is not explicitly stated, with the functions prioritising
        banking activities. The SRDB’s vision is to ‘become the financial pillar of economic cooperation among ECO
        member states by fostering sustainable economic development and integration’ (ETDB 2018, 6), and its mission is
        to promote private and public sector investment, foster intra-regional trade, contribute to economic and social
        development for the welfare of people in the ECO region, and promote good governance and environmental
        consciousness, a mission transferrable with most of the other MDBs.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are six ETDB <a class="item2"></a>shareholders – membership eligibility is restricted to ECO member
        countries and the Bank has encouraged the four remaining ECO members to join. Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey are
        the main shareholders, each controlling 30.6% of voting power. The remaining 8% is divided between Afghanistan
        (4.59%), Azerbaijan (2.98%), and Kyrgyzstan (0.61%). The ECO’s three founding members clearly dominate the
        SRDB, reflected further in that ETDB is headquartered in Istanbul, Turkey, and has two representative offices:
        one in Iran and one in Pakistan. As small SRDB, it employed just 38 staff in December 2017.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The incumbent ETDB President is Yalçın Yüksel, a Turkish national, who assumed office in November 2019, his
        previous position being Acting Director General of Public Finance at the Turkish Ministry of Treasury and
        Finance. President Yüksel succeeded President Javaid Aslam, a Pakistani national, who was appointed in 2015 and
        who previously served as Secretary to the Prime Minister of Pakistan. President Aslam was preceded by Iranian
        Hossein Ghazavi, who took office in 2011 and who was previously First Vice Governor of the Iran Central Bank.
        The three main ETDB members have rotated their presidential leadership. As per the ETDB’s Articles, the term of
        the first president was five years while each subsequent president is appointed for four-year terms.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        Between 2008 and 2017, ETDB approved $1.3 billion in loans to its member countries; but disbursements totalled
        $507 million, meaning that a large portion of approved loans are awaiting disbursement. The SRDB offers
        project, corporate, trade, and SME finance and co-financing and soft loans. Priority sectors are
        transportation, agricultural infrastructure, and energy, with a focus on intra-regional integration. Over its
        first decade, the geographical focus of operations disproportionately focussed on the three main shareholders:
        Turkey (58.2%), Iran (18.8%), and Pakistan (18.6%); over 95% of all approvals (Engen and Prizzon 2018).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the ETDB reflects the traits of other small-scale MDBs, notably its narrow membership, capital
        base, annual approvals, and absent credit rating. It is part of a sub-regional organisation but largely serves
        the three main shareholders. Given its reliance on these states, its continuing operations are largely
        contingent on the capacity of Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan to coordinate.
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="calibre1">
      <h2 class="item5">7.15 <a class="item6"></a>Eurasian Development Bank</h2>

      <div class="item">
        Eurasian regional integration has progressed gradually since the collapse of the Soviet Union. While
        initiatives were stalled during the 1990s, due to <a class="item2"></a>successive banking and financial crises
        impacting transitioning economies, important strides were made late in the decade and throughout the 2000s and
        2010s. In 1999, a treaty was signed by several Eurasian countries to establish in future the Eurasian Customs
        Union and Single Economic Space, followed in 2000 with the founding of the Eurasian Economic Community
        (EURASEC), which was based on the EEC (Vinokurov 2018). The Eurasian Customs Union became effective in January
        2010, conceived as a mechanism to integrate former Soviet states. In January 2012, the Eurasian Economic Space
        became effective. Both were followed by the Eurasian Economic Union (<abbr>EAEU</abbr>), signed in May 2014 and
        effective in January 2015. As part of the complex emergent architecture of Eurasian integration, the EDB became
        an important financial pillar, acting as part of a ‘new wave’ of integration tools offering institutional
        support to economic ties (Vinokurov 2018, 5).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EDB was established in 2006 with a $1.5 billion capital base at the initiative of Russian President
        <a class="item2"></a>Vladimir Putin and Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev. Its Articles outline the SRDB’s
        purposes as to ‘foster the strengthening and development of market economy in the member states… and to enhance
        trade and economic integration among them by engaging in investment activities’ (EDB 2006). Its
        responsibilities are largely the promotion of financial and economic cooperation, very much following the IIB
        and <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> conservative investment bank format.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        There are six EDB member countries. In addition to founding shareholders Russia and Kazakhstan, Armenia,
        Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan joined between 2009 and 2011. In practice, Russia and Kazakhstan
        effectively control the Bank, not surprising given that Russia holds 65.97% capital share and Kazakhstan
        32.99%. The remaining shareholders own just over 1% collectively. Alongside the IIB and <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>, the
        EDB is the third SRDB operating as an extension of Russian foreign and economic policy.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        A Chairperson leads the EDB. To date, three <a class="item2"></a>Chairpersons have led it, all of whom have
        been Russian. The first was Igor Finogenov, in office from 2006 to 2015, who prior to his appointment was a
        commercial banker. Dmitry Pankin succeeded Finogenov in 2015 but remained in office only for two years before
        being appointed the incumbent <abbr>BSTDB</abbr> President. Andrey Belyaninov succeeded Pankin in December 2017
        (Vinokurov 2018).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In 2018, EDB’s <a class="item2"></a>cumulative lending portfolio held 85 projects: 84 projects in its member
        countries and one direct investment fund participation project. By 2020, its cumulative loan portfolio totalled
        $8.2 billion. Electric power, finance, transport, and mining have been the main sectors financed (Vinokurov
        2019). In 2018, EDB approved 29 new projects totalling $1.4 billion, highlighting that despite being a new MDB
        it has the capital to approve considerably larger annual commitments than most other SRDBs. Russia and
        Kazakhstan are historically the largest recipients of EDB finances, with 47.1% of approvals to Russia and 36.4%
        to Kazakhstan in 2018.
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The <a class="item2"></a>Eurasian Fund for Stabilisation and Development (EFSD), previously known as the
        EURASEC Fund, was established in 2009 ‘as a response to the challenges of the global economic crisis’
        (Vinokurov 2018, 5). EDB administers EFSD’s staffing, administration, and financial modelling, but final
        decision-making is vested in the Council of the Fund. EFSD offers financial assistance to its member countries
        with priority focus on anti-crisis, balance of payments, and stabilisation programmes (Vinokurov 2018, 62). It
        thus resembles the IMF to a degree, although its operations go beyond the IMF’s mandate (Fritz and Mühlich
        2019). The Fund’s capital resources are $9.1 billion, with its capital drawn from contributions and not raised
        in capital markets. In 2019, its portfolio comprised 15 projects with $5.5 billion accumulated financial
        commitments, 90% of which were for budgetary support (Vinokurov, Efimov, and Levenkov 2019).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        The EDB established a Technical Assistance Fund (TAF) in 2008 to provide financial support for pre-investment
        and innovation research, build regional integration, strengthen market infrastructures, and ensure sustainable
        growth. As of 2017, <a class="item2"></a>TAF’s cumulative portfolio included 63 projects totalling $7.2
        million, with the majority approved as part of investment projects (49%) and regional integration studies (34%)
        (EDB 2018). In addition, illustrating its focus on regional integration, EDB has developed the Integration
        Barometer ‘to study the attitudes of citizens in member states towards the creation of the <abbr>EAEU</abbr>,
        as well as the opinions of citizens of other countries regarding the possibility of them joining the Union’
        (Vinokurov 2018, 57).
      </div>

      <div class="item1">
        In summary, the EDB is a mid-tier SRDB promoting Eurasian regional integration. Comparable to the IIB and
        <abbr>BSTDB</abbr>, however, it is also a foreign policy extension of its leading shareholder – Russia – and
        thus mirrors the US in the World Bank and China in the <abbr>AIIB</abbr>. Yet, in this case, Russia is a
        borrowing member country and not just an <a class="item2"></a>organisational and decision-making hegemon. It
        demonstrates that playing a leading role in an MDB is an item on the checklist of many major powers and the
        financial resources MDBs control are politically useful.
      </div>
    </div>

    </div>
</body>
</html>
