<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterTitle1">A New Preface from Michael Cox, 2016</p>
<p class="header1" id="fm03-head1">A Carr for the Twenty-First Century</p>
<p class="NoIndent">For a generation which never really experienced the Cold War, or who came to intellectual maturity long after it had become but a distant memory, it is difficult, if not impossible, to convey what an extraordinary shock it was to nearly all of us to see the certainties of nearly 40 years simply evaporate before our very eyes between 1989 and 1991. Of course, for those who had always preached that there was no rational alternative to the market, the collapse of an old order underpinned as it was by what Ronald Reagan had earlier called an ‘evil empire’ could only be welcomed. Yet others were not so certain. Indeed, one of the more famous doyens of academic International Relations (IR) warned both liberals and triumphalists that the world might soon be missing the Cold War or at least should not be welcoming its passing with such gusto.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn1" id="fm03_fn1">1</a> He was right to sound a note of warning. Indeed, when the demise of Soviet power was followed in turn by the tragic collapse of former Yugoslavia, genocide in Rwanda, economic catastrophe in ‘reforming’ Russia itself, a horrifying but successful attack on the USA in 9 September 2001, the Iraq war, the great financial crash of 2008, and then, to cap it all, a revolt in North Africa which began with such high expectations but very soon threatened to destroy the state system in the Middle East, then it was palpably obvious that, that much heralded ‘new world order’ announced back in 1991 by President George H.W. Bush was not about to be realized any time soon.</p>
<p class="para">Meanwhile, the discipline of IR, having first tried to come to terms with the end of a bipolar order it had for decades assumed to be stable, has been struggling ever since to make sense of an international system which in one sense has never been so peaceful—great power war we are told is a thing of the past—but at another so full of so many risks. The world today may be richer, more democratic, more middle class and just a little less scarred by the kinds of poverty once assumed to be normal in the ‘Third World’. Globalization has delivered something as economists constantly remind us. But never has this same world been so unequal, or, its future prospects apparently so uncertain. Indeed, it is difficult to know where to start, with all manner of danger arising—or so we have been warned— from either the long-term decline of the West, a ‘new’ Cold War between Russia and the West, and of course by the apparently irresistible rise of China which according to some pundits at least (including some in China itself) can only end in tragedy.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn2" id="fm03_fn2">2</a> Add to this the threat caused by the failure of several states close to Europe and the possible collapse of the European project itself, then it is fairly self-evident why many are now insisting that we are living through seriously dangerous and uncertain times with possibly much worse to come.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn3" id="fm03_fn3">3</a></p>
<p class="para">Amidst all this change it is perhaps reassuring that a number of more historically minded scholars have returned to look in a more systematic way at some of the early classics of the discipline. Whether this is because they are finding it impossible to make sense of the real world with all the new theories that have been served up on the academic menu over the past two decades, or simply because they believe that the past (and an older) generation of writers has something to tell us, does not really matter much. The fact of the matter is that since the early 1990s, and amidst all the turmoil, there has been a veritable flood of significant work on some of the founding fathers of IR.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn4" id="fm03_fn4">4</a></p>
<p class="para">One of these ‘fathers’ of course is Hans J. Morgenthau. Born into a ‘morbid age’ in which civilization itself seemed to be on the brink of collapse,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn5" id="fm03_fn5">5</a> Morgenthau later tried to draw upon his own experiences as a German Jew, an émigré, and a representative of a generation of European thinkers who had experienced fascism first-hand, to help explain the harsh character of the ‘real’ world to an America which he felt had neither the wisdom nor the experience to run the international system effectively. Erudite, ambitious and immensely well connected—a would-be ‘Prince’ to those who wielded power—Morgenthau <span class="italic">was</span> IR for a generation of students in the West after the war. Yet influential though he may well have been— even critics still talk of his work as having been ‘path breaking’<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn6" id="fm03_fn6">6</a>—by the time of his death in 1980, his intellectual star had faded amongst an up-and-coming generation who regarded him as something of a pre-theoretical ‘has been’ who had little interest in morality, even less in peace, and whose realism had either led to an uncritical defence of power politics (untrue) to a justification for US expansionism (even less true) or refusing to think about any possible alternative to the existing state system (perhaps the biggest canard of all). Moreover, as realism went out of intellectual fashion following the end of the Cold War, Morgenthau appeared to become little more than an historical footnote in a subject now increasingly shaped by a new wave of scholars who believed that his kind of realism, or indeed any kind of realism, had not only failed to predict the end of the Cold War (sin of all sins) but was steeped in the false enlightenment idea that one could—‘objectively speaking’—know the world scientifically.</p>
<p class="para">Yet the heart of the corpse that was realism never quite stopped beating, and as the first flush of post-Cold War euphoria passed, Morgenthau began to make something of a comeback. In fact, within a fairly short space of time he had become a minor cult figure amongst certain scholars—at least that is how it appeared in terms of the number of articles<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn7" id="fm03_fn7">7</a> and volumes that now began to flow from the press. Amongst the more interesting of the books at least was an original biography which dealt with his early years,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn8" id="fm03_fn8">8</a> another significant work—by a left-wing writer no less—on the progressive character of his realism,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn9" id="fm03_fn9">9</a> a study on the Jewish sources of his thought,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn10" id="fm03_fn10">10</a> another rather more obscure work on his discussion of Aristotle,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn11" id="fm03_fn11">11</a> and an important edited volume which amongst other things tried to show that Morgenthau was a much more complex and interesting figure than the one-sided, almost cartoon-like figure still routinely referred to in even the better of the modern IR textbooks.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn12" id="fm03_fn12">12</a> Criticized at different times for being either too wordy, too reductionist, too much focused on power or horror of horrors—too state centric, it would be no exaggeration to say that his reputation today has never been higher.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn13" id="fm03_fn13">13</a></p>
<p class="para">In many ways, Ken Waltz needed no such rehabilitation. His two great books on IR (the first being by far and away the more original of the two) virtually defined the subject of IR after Morgenthau.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn14" id="fm03_fn14">14</a> As one writer has put it, these two studies alone ‘provided the framework within and against [which] international-relations argued for much of the post-WWII period’.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn15" id="fm03_fn15">15</a> Eschewing Morgenthau’s rather long-winded digressions on the history of diplomacy—not to mention his ill-conceived attempt to root the sources of state behaviour in ‘human nature’—Waltz provided something which Morgenthau probably never did: a more systematic theory of international politics with clear causal categories which helped explain why states behaved in the way in which they did and whether or not they were likely to survive in a world where power was always going to be unequally distributed. Conceptually rigorous in his claims, but never claiming that his theory explained everything about the foreign policy of a particular state, his influence was, by any measure, immense. Moreover, with a rare capacity to sometimes think the unthinkable—the Cold War contributed to order he once argued,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn16" id="fm03_fn16">16</a> and Iran getting a nuclear weapon may be no bad thing he later insisted<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn17" id="fm03_fn17">17</a>—Waltz was never less than challenging, interesting or influential.</p>
<p class="para">Still, even his version of realism suffered the same critical fate as that of Morgenthau following the end of the Cold War. But again, like Morgenthau, he too has been revisited of late, and not just in the many heartfelt and generous tributes that were (justifiably) heaped upon him following his death in 2013.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn18" id="fm03_fn18">18</a> Indeed, only a few years earlier his many virtues were celebrated, and some of his weaknesses criticized, in a conference which referred to Waltz as being ‘The King of Thought’. This was followed, a short while after, with a volume based on the conference (held in Aberystwyth) in which he was described by its British editor as being no more, and no less, than the ‘ indispensable theorist’ of IR.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn19" id="fm03_fn19">19</a> A year on and Ken Booth was making equally strong claims. Indeed, in a powerful and effective attack on the pretensions of most IR theories and theorists who had presumed to dismiss writers like Waltz, Ken Booth took a few intellectual prisoners in one of the more powerful modern defences of ‘critical’ realism in general and Waltz’s understanding of international politics in particular.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn20" id="fm03_fn20">20</a></p>
<p class="para">If Waltz became mainstream in American IR, the same could hardly be said of E.H. Carr, a Cambridge classicist turned Foreign Office mandarin who went on to write biographies of radical thinkers before taking up a Chair in International Politics at the then University College of Wales, Aberystwyth named after an American president—Woodrow Wilson—whose reputation he then set about trying to destroy! A public intellectual of some influence who made more enemies than friends, and who as one admirer put it, simply could not stop himself taking pot shots at an establishment of which in some ways he was part, Carr always was, and still remains, a difficult writer to pin down.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn21" id="fm03_fn21">21</a> Indeed, only a few years after having authored what is now regarded as one of the classics of IR—<span class="italic">The Twenty Years</span>’ <span class="italic">Crisis</span> no less—he almost seemed to ignore the discipline altogether, even suggesting at one point that he wished he had had nothing to do with launching IR in the first place. Nor did he take any interest in the many ‘great debates’ that marked the history of IR in the post-war period, including, interestingly, those that revolved around his own contribution to the subject. There was work to be done he insisted, and work hard he undoubtedly did on his many volumes devoted to the history of Soviet Russia in its early years. But as for IR, it was to all intents and purposes a field that held very little interest for him right up until his death in 1982.</p>
<p class="para">None of this however made much difference to students and scholars of IR. In fact, while Carr himself was busying himself in the archives trying to make sense of the great struggles that finally culminated with the rise of Stalin, his work in IR continued to be discussed and debated, nowhere more seriously at first than in the USA itself where a generation of post-war realists—including Morgenthau—drew inspiration from his insights.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn22" id="fm03_fn22">22</a> Of course, like all realists, Carr suffered in reputation when the Cold War came to an end. If anything, he possibly suffered more because his ‘side’ in the Cold War—the USSR—lost. Yet while his standing in the field of Soviet history declined precipitately, his reputation in IR went from strength to strength—so much so that Carr today can lay claim to at least one full-length biography written by a former student,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn23" id="fm03_fn23">23</a> a study of his years as a journalist while at <span class="italic">The Times</span> during World War II,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn24" id="fm03_fn24">24</a> a couple of edited volumes,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn25" id="fm03_fn25">25</a> a new edition of his most significant volume on IR,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn26" id="fm03_fn26">26</a> a translation of the same into at least one foreign language,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn27" id="fm03_fn27">27</a> and several other articles and book chapters dealing in a largely sympathetic way with his ideas across the range.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn28" id="fm03_fn28">28</a> More recently we have even had the rather interesting spectacle of a well-known American realist defending Carr against his would-be British (mis)interpreters.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn29" id="fm03_fn29">29</a> Not that Carr had in earlier times been much feted by what passed for British IR in the post-war period. Too important to ignore entirely (though significantly he was not invited to join the British Committee for the Theory of International Politics when it was set up in 1958) Carr was always the outsider, regarded by insiders like Herbert Butterfield, Hedley Bull and Martin Wight as something of a pariah, roundly condemned not only for his foreign policy views before the war, but for having written a book before it which in the view of one writer (a celebrated member of the same Committee) was not merely the product of ‘diseased times’ with little to say about the world more generally and the field of IR more particularly, but according to Bull at least, of having questioned the very idea of international society, an idea ‘with which a new analysis of the problem of IR should now begin’.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn30" id="fm03_fn30">30</a></p>
<p class="para">That said, one can still legitimately ask, what does a writer who was a product of what is now fashionably called the “long” twentieth century have to say about the many issues facing the international system today? and more specifically, why has there been a surge of interest in Carr over the past few years? Carr after all seemed to stand on the wrong side of history in that long drawn out contest between actually existing socialism and imperfectly functioning liberal capitalism. Some of his views on German foreign policy in the 1930s look dubious to say the least. His (by no means uncritical) support for the USSR against its western critics now appears decidedly bizarre. And his attachment to old-fashioned historical materialism looks methodologically dubious to a current generation schooled in everything but. Nevertheless, interest in his work has never seemed to be as great.</p>
<p class="para">There are a number of possible answers to this conundrum. One clearly relates to the new ways in which a younger generation of writers has started to look into the real as opposed to the imagined history of IR as an academic discipline.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn31" id="fm03_fn31">31</a> When the discipline was much younger there was, naturally enough, not much interest in uncovering its past. Moreover, when people did begin to write about that past as they increasingly did in the USA after the war, it was invariably presented in the form of a ‘great debate’ between an earlier generation of liberal ‘utopians’ who promoted the naïve and potentially dangerous view that the League of Nations and international law could save the world from the scourge of armed conflict and a later generation of realists—Carr most obviously—who preached the virtues of power politics while rejecting the idea that the world system could be managed or its contradictions tamed by passing fine resolutions in Geneva. This utopian way of thinking about the inter-war system (as Carr defined liberal theorists in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years</span>’ <span class="italic">Crisis</span>) had many problems, but the most crucial—it was reasoned—was that it was bound to lead to illusions, including the illusion that good men and good women could work together across borders to tame the beast that had led to wars in the past and could easily do so again in the future.</p>
<p class="para">This particular reading of the subject has come under massive assault over the past few years.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn32" id="fm03_fn32">32</a> As a result what we might call the traditional narrative— in large part based on Carr’s caricature of his liberal opponents’ position in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years</span>’ <span class="italic">Crisis</span>—has been replaced by a more nuanced and, it should be said, much more convincing account—and one thing appears to have emerged from all this: there was almost certainly no great ‘debate’ between a well-defined bloc of starry-eyed idealists on the one side and hard-nosed realists on the other. In fact, according to modern scholarship, there were several alternative positions in vogue during the inter-war period ranging from those on the left who thought capitalism was the main cause of conflict,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn33" id="fm03_fn33">33</a> through to reformist writers who hoped the world could be made safer without fundamental change,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn34" id="fm03_fn34">34</a> on to those on the geopolitical right who thought that war was not only inevitable but possibly desirable too. Either way it is simply wrong to think of the discussion about the future of international affairs between the two wars as being between liberal idealists who simply did not grasp how the ‘real world’ operated and all-knowing, wise, yet cynical realists like Carr who did.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn35" id="fm03_fn35">35</a></p>
<p class="para">The attempt to rethink the history of IR has also led some writers to look at yet another, equally important issue relating to the nature of realism more generally.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn36" id="fm03_fn36">36</a> For earlier writers there was really not much to discuss. Realism it was often thought (quite often by those who failed to read the realists themselves) flowed from an essentialist understanding of an international system whose immutable logic could not be altered, whose structures could not be changed, where power was the only thing that mattered, and whose principal organizing unit—the state— meant that the world was bound to continue along its same competitive path for ever. But as more modern analysts have noted, this not only simplifies the nature of realism. It is basically misleading when it comes to thinking about Carr himself. Indeed, as one writer pointed in a seminal piece, Carr’s analysis neither implied that the world was unchanging (quite the opposite in fact) or that one should not think seriously about how the world might be changed for the better.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn37" id="fm03_fn37">37</a> Nor is it accurate to portray realism, as many once did, as being by definition conservative. Take Carr himself. For the greater part of his life he stood on the left. His classic, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, was suffused with Marxist categories. His closest colleague during the Cold War moreover was the Marxist historian Isaac Deutscher.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn38" id="fm03_fn38">38</a> And while he published nothing of note on IR after 1945, he did in fact publish fairly regularly in the left-wing journal <span class="italic">New Left Review</span>.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn39" id="fm03_fn39">39</a> Of course, other realists did not share all of Carr’s enthusiasms. But nor were they the rather drab group of apologists for the powerful they were often portrayed as being by critics. Thus Morgenthau opposed US interventions in the Third World; Waltz was no defender of unalloyed American power either—indeed always warned of the dangers of the USA possessing too much power after the Cold War; and very much later, the bulk of American realists (including Ken Waltz amongst many others) came out against the Iraq War. In fact, a very strong case could be made—and has been in recent work—that far from being an ideology of the powerful, realism might be better understood as a way of criticizing the uses and abuses of power by the powerful.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn40" id="fm03_fn40">40</a></p>
<p class="para">This brings us then to another fairly obvious reason why realism more generally, and perhaps Carr’s particular form of it, has been revisited with such gusto of late. This relates to something discussed earlier: namely, the increasingly disturbed character of the modern world. For several years it was fashionable to believe—in fact liberals took it as a given—that the collapse of communism followed in turn by the spread of the market would help resolve most, if not all, of the world’s problems.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn41" id="fm03_fn41">41</a> We were even told by certain writers that increased turbulence in an age of globalization where non-state actors were becoming increasingly important rendered not only realism irrelevant, but states too. As we now know, things have not quite turned out that way. Indeed, over the past few years the international system has confronted several rather old-fashioned challenges that liberals and others of a more post-modern persuasion believed had been consigned to that proverbial dustbin of history.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn42" id="fm03_fn42">42</a> Some of these it is true have stemmed from major foreign policy errors by the USA itself. But the most significant have arisen either because of a shift in the balance of power which has worked to the disadvantage of the West more generally or because new rising powers like China simply refuse to play by rules laid down by old ones.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn43" id="fm03_fn43">43</a> Either way, the power struggle between states goes on and, in many ways, is going on with an increasing intensity that many liberal theorists must find difficult to explain.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn44" id="fm03_fn44">44</a> Nor have other theories fared any better. Indeed, those like James Rosenau (a considerable figure in the field to be sure) who had earlier talked of the world having become ‘post-international’<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn45" id="fm03_fn45">45</a> now look like having been left with nowhere to hide in an international environment where those so-called defunct entities known as states are continuing to compete with great determination to ensure that their position, and not someone else’s, is the one that continues to determine outcomes in an international system where the strong still try to do what they want—though not always successfully to be sure— while the weak, as another critical realist of a fairly radical disposition has pointed out, continue to suffer what they must.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn46" id="fm03_fn46">46</a></p>
<p class="para">Of course, the world today is a very different place to the one Carr inhabited.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn47" id="fm03_fn47">47</a> Nonetheless, there is at least one major issue that Carr addressed back in the 1930s which continues to have enormous significance for the world today, namely: how to prevent great shifts of power leading to intense competition with the ever present possibility of war as a result. As anybody familiar with Carr’s work knows, his discussion on what he termed ‘peaceful change’, or more precisely of how to ‘effect necessary and desirable changes’ without this leading to, or being brought about through, war, forms a central part of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. In purely policy terms it is in effect the main reason why he wrote the book in the first place, and why he ended up suggesting (controversially) that unless something was done to accommodate Germany, the rising power, then war would, inevitably, follow. His prediction of course turned out to be true. However, his advocacy of a policy of appeasement came under sustained attack at the time and has been used ever since to blacken his reputation. Yet even if his foreign policy seemed to have gotten Hitler and Nazi Germany very badly wrong, his more general argument—that coming to terms with rising powers was at least something worth contemplating if one wished to avoid the bloody alternative—is one that has much contemporary relevance. Indeed, there are many today who have revisited Carr and his notion of ‘peaceful change’ and wondered whether this idea forged in the 1930s when the West confronted a very assertive Germany may not have some relevance today in relation to China. The differences between Germany then and China now are immense, as even the most hard-nosed of American strategists recognizes. Yet there are still lessons to be drawn from the past, and in many ways it was to be the Chinese who initially drew them.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn48" id="fm03_fn48">48</a> In fact, their own contribution to the contemporary IR debate borrows heavily from history, and based upon their reading of what happened before when in the twentieth century other great powers rose with ultimately disastrous consequences, they have come to the not-illogical conclusion (though whether they still adhere to this idea today is now contested) that the only way forward for them was by rising ‘peacefully’. Indeed, their own theory of the ‘peaceful rise’ appears to have more than a passing resemblance to debates that happened long ago in Europe—debates in which Carr himself was centrally involved.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn49" id="fm03_fn49">49</a></p>
<p class="para">But if Carr had interesting things to say about peaceful change in world politics, he had equally important things to say about the fate of modern Europe and the role of the nation-state after World War II. Much has been written about his views on nationalism and the importance of moving beyond the nation-state in the process of building a new international order. Indeed, as one of the most influential writers on nationalism—Ernest Gellner—readily conceded, his own work borrowed heavily from Carr, most obviously from his important study, <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span> published in 1945.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn50" id="fm03_fn50">50</a> But if Carr’s work on nationalism is by now well known,<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn51" id="fm03_fn51">51</a> his more general observations about post-war Europe have gone largely, although not entirely, unnoticed. But not any longer it would seem; and ever since the appearance of an earlier study on how British policymakers began to rethink Europe after World War II, there has been growing interest in Carr’s much understudied work in this particular area.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn52" id="fm03_fn52">52</a> According to this new work, Carr’s views on the ‘new Europe’ after World War II were not just original and possibly prescient too, but also prove that realists, as much as liberal, had and have important things to say about the European project. In fact, according to two of the ‘new’ Carr scholars, Carr’s brand of subtle realism combining both an appreciation of power married to a vision about the continent’s future could easily be used as the starting-point for explaining both the huge steps taken by Europe after 1945 as well as the many problems facing the European project today.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn53" id="fm03_fn53">53</a></p>
<p class="para">But as others have also been quick to point out, if Carr’s discussion about one part of Europe after World War II has generated much positive comment, his views about states in the eastern half of the continent have been the subject of very harsh criticism indeed. The problem began early when Carr as a young diplomat became involved in trying to negotiate a way forward for the ‘new’ states of Europe following the collapse of the main European empires after World War I. As he himself openly confessed, the whole experience left him very badly scarred and he came away from the peace conference in Paris with a very deep suspicion of the Wilsonian idea of self-determination in general (another reason for his opposition to the liberals) and the rights of small nations in particular. He was certainly no great fan of Poland or Polish nationalists, and had little sympathy for democratic countries like Czechoslovakia either—which in part helps explain why he felt little moral angst when Germany took over a large swathe of Czechoslovakia (the Sudetenland) in late 1938. The Soviet Union’s entry into the war three years later only strengthened his view that the small nations of East and Central Europe had no future as self-governing countries. Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania were in a particularly vulnerable position. Carr followed developments there with great interest. Initially supportive of their independence just after World War I, within a few years he was already beginning to think of them in the past tense, almost as the by-products of an unfortunate bout of enthusiasm for a liberal principle which had accompanied the making of the peace in 1919. Anyway, large units he opined were economically more rational than smaller ones, small nations standing alone would for ever be a source of instability, and as part of the new USSR—a multi-national entity committed to progressive policies—the rag bag of failed nations that had emerged from the rubble of empire after World War I had a much better chance of experiencing the benefits of modernity than if they tried to stand alone.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn54" id="fm03_fn54">54</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr’s apparent indifference to the fate of small states should of necessity alert us to the simple fact that he was no political saint. On the other hand, his more general warning that nationalism as an ideology and self-determination as a principle might not provide an answer to the ‘national question’, let alone form the basis of a just, stable or open international order, is one we ignore at our peril as we move ever deeper into the twenty-first century. Indeed, his tough-minded and far-from-popular views, on this and many other issues, may in large part explain why Carr—warts and all—continues to exercise a continuing fascination for scholars.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn55" id="fm03_fn55">55</a> Carr also reminds us of all of something else as well which has effectively been forgotten by most modern academics: that it is just as important (if not more) for intellectuals to engage in public debate about the real world than it is to publish increasingly specialized articles in increasingly specialized (but highly ranked) journals which only academics read. Carr of course had the ‘privilege’ of living through interesting and challenging times which, it has often been observed, frequently tend to produce writers of great originality whose work is then revisited by later generations. Whether our own times will produce another writer precisely like Carr seems unlikely given so much of what he wrote was conditioned by a revolutionary tide that has over the past 25 years has been ebbing fast, a world depression which in spite of the 2008 crash has so far not been repeated, and two global wars from which policymakers worldwide seem to have drawn the obvious lesson of never again. Yet as even the most establishment observers of the world scene have been forced to concede, we are today living in deeply unsettling times where the abnormal has become the new normal and the future an unknown place. Another rather different but equally disturbing ‘twenty years’ crisis’ could be beckoning—we may already be in it—and one can only hope that our own disturbed times is able to produce thinkers like Carr to help us understand the reasons for our current malaise; and how we might then begin to think of realistic but radical solutions to make the world a better place—a place, where to quote Carr, men and women can ‘exercise’ their ‘reason’ so as to ‘understand’ their ‘environment’ better, and having understood it, ‘act’ in order to create the conditions of a more peaceful and just world.<a class="sup" href="#fm03-fn56" id="fm03_fn56">56</a></p>
<p class="para"> </p>
<p class="paraRight">Michael Cox</p>
<p class="paraRight">London, UK</p>
<p class="chapterTitle"> </p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn1" id="fm03-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">John J. Mearsheimer, ‘Why We Will Soon Miss The Cold War’. <span class="italic">The Atlantic Monthly</span>, 266(2), 35–50, August 1990.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn2" id="fm03-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See the early warning by John Mearsheimer, ‘China’s Unpeaceful Rise’. <span class="italic">Current History</span>, 105, 160–162, April 2006.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn3" id="fm03-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Ken Booth, <span class="italic">Theory of World Security</span>. Cambridge: Cambridge 0University Press, 2007, especially pp. 396–426.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn4" id="fm03-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Duncan Bell, ‘International Relations: The Dawn of a Historiographical Turn’. <span class="italic">British Journal of Politics and International Relations</span> 2001, 3(1), 115–126.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn5" id="fm03-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Richard Overy, <span class="italic">The Morbid Age</span>: <span class="italic">Britain and the Crisis of Civilization, 1919–1939</span>. London, Penguin Books, 2010.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn6" id="fm03-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Robert Kaufman, ‘Morgenthau’s Unrealistic Realism’. <span class="italic">Yale Journal of International Affairs</span>, 1(2), 24–38, Spring 2006. <a href="http://www.yale.edu/yjia/articles/Vol_1_Iss_2_Spring2006/kaufman217.pdf">http://www.yale.edu/yjia/articles/Vol_1_Iss_2_Spring2006/kaufman217.pdf</a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn7" id="fm03-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Of the more sophisticated modern attempts to reclaim Morgenthau see Sean Molloy, ‘Truth, Power, Theory: Hans J. Morgenthau ‘s Formulation of Realism’. <span class="italic">Diplomacy and Statecraft</span>, 15(1), 1–34, 2004; and William E. Scheuerman, ‘Was Morgenthau a Realist? Revisiting Scientific Man vs Power Politics’, <span class="italic">Constellations</span>, 14(4), 506–530, 2007.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn8" id="fm03-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Christian Frei, <span class="italic">Hans J. Morgenthau: An Intellectual Biography</span>. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2001.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn9" id="fm03-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">William E. Scheuerman, <span class="italic">Hans Morgenthau: Realism and Beyond</span>. Cambridge, Polity Press, 2009.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn10" id="fm03-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">M. Benjamin Mollov, <span class="italic">Power and Transcendence: Hans J. Morgenthau and the Jewish Experience</span>. Lexington Books, Rowman and Littlefield Publishing Group, 2002.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn11" id="fm03-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Anthony F. Lang ed; <span class="italic">Political Theory and International Affairs: Hans J. Morgenthau on Aristotle’s The Politics.</span> London, Praeger, 2004.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn12" id="fm03-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Michael C. Williams ed; <span class="italic">Realism Reconsidered: The Legacy of Hans J. Morgenthau in International Relations.</span> Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2007.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn13" id="fm03-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Daniel Levine, ‘Why Hans Morgenthau was not a Critical Realist (and Why Contemporary IR Realists Should Care)’. <span class="italic">International Relations</span>, 27(1), 95–118, 2012.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn14" id="fm03-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Ken Waltz, <span class="italic">Man, The State and War</span>. Columbia University Press, 1959 and <span class="italic">Theory of International Politics,</span> McGraw Hill, 1979.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn15" id="fm03-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Dan Nexon quoted in <span class="italic">Outside the Beltway</span>, 16 May 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn16" id="fm03-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Ken Waltz, ‘The Stability of a Bipolar World’. <span class="italic">Daedalus</span>, 93(3), 881–903, Summer 1964.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn17" id="fm03-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Kenneth Waltz, ‘Why Iran Should get the Bomb: Nuclear Balancing Would Mean Stability’. <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, July/August 2012.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn18" id="fm03-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See, for instance, J. Dana Stuster, ‘Requiem for a Realist: The Legacy of Kenneth Waltz’. <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, 16 May 2013, and Robert Art and Robert Jervis, ‘Kenneth Waltz and his Legacy’. <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, 22 May 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn19" id="fm03-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Ken Booth <span class="italic">Realism and World Politics</span>. London and New York, Routledge, 2011.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn20" id="fm03-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Ken Booth, ‘Problem Solvers of the World Unite! Waltz and the Critical Project’. <span class="italic">Australian Journal of Political Science</span>, 49(3), 558–563, 2014.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn21" id="fm03-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">I discuss the extraordinary range of Carr’s interests—no narrow-minded academic specialist he—in my ‘Will the Real E.H. Carr Please stand up?’. <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, 75(3), 643–653, 1999.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn22" id="fm03-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hans J. Morgenthau, ‘The Political Science of E.H. Carr’. <span class="italic">World Politics</span>, 1(1), 127– 134, 1948.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn23" id="fm03-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Jonathan Haslam<span class="italic">, Vices of Integrity: E.H. Carr, 1892–1982</span>. London, Verso, 1999.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn24" id="fm03-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Charles Jones, <span class="italic">E.H. Carr and International Relations: a Duty To Lie.</span> Cambridge University Press, 1998.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn25" id="fm03-fn25">25.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Tim Dunne, Michael Cox and Ken Booth eds; <span class="italic">The Eighty Years Crisis: International Relations, 1919–1999.</span> Cambridge University Press, 1998, and my <span class="italic">E.H. Carr: A Critical Appraisal.</span> Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2000.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn26" id="fm03-fn26">26.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was reissued after a long absence in 2001. Sales of the book since have soared.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn27" id="fm03-fn27">27.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Alessandro Campi, ed; Edward H. Carr, <span class="italic">Utopia E Realta: Un’Introduzione Allo Studioe Della Politica Internazionale,</span> Rubbetino Editore, 2009.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn28" id="fm03-fn28">28.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Probably the two best starting points here would be Peter Wilson, ‘Radicalism for a Conservative Purpose: the Peculiar Realism of E.H. Carr’<span class="italic">. Millennium</span>, 30(1), 123–136, 2001, and Sean Molloy’s, ‘Dialectics and Transformations: Exploring the International Theory of E.H. Carr’. <span class="italic">International Journal of Politics, Culture and Society</span>, <span class="italic">16</span>(4), 279–306, 2003.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn29" id="fm03-fn29">29.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">John Mearsheimer, ‘E.H. Carr vs Idealism: The Battle Rages On’. <span class="italic">International Relations,</span> 19(2), 139–152, 2005.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn30" id="fm03-fn30">30.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hedley Bull, ‘The Twenty Years Crisis Thirty Years on’. <span class="italic">International Journal</span>, 24(4), 638, 1969.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn31" id="fm03-fn31">31.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Brian C. Schmidt ed; <span class="italic">International Relations and the First Great Debate</span>. London and New York, Routledge, 2012.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn32" id="fm03-fn32">32.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See, for example Peter Lamb, ‘E.H. Carr, Norman Angell and Reassessing the Realist-Utopian Debate’. <span class="italic">International History Review</span>, 35(5), 1156–1184, 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn33" id="fm03-fn33">33.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">On the British left and international affairs in the inter-war period see Peter Wilson’s <span class="italic">The International Theory of Leonard Woolf: A Study in Twentieth Century Idealism.</span> London, Palgrave, 2005 and Lucian Ashworth, <span class="italic">International Relations Theory and the Labour Party: Intellectuals and Policy Making 1918–1945</span>. London, I. B. Tauris, 2007. See also Peter Lamb, ‘The British Left in the Problems of Peace lectures: 1926–1938: Diversity that E.H. Carr Ignored’. <span class="italic">International History Review,</span> 36(3), 530–549, 2014.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn34" id="fm03-fn34">34.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See William H. McNeill’s, <span class="italic">Arnold Toynbee: A Life.</span> New York and Oxford, Oxford University, 1989, for a guide to the views of the best known reformist of the inter-war years.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn35" id="fm03-fn35">35.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See David Long and Peter Wilson eds, <span class="italic">Thinkers of the Twenty Years’ Crisis: Inter-War idealism Reassessed</span>. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1995.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn36" id="fm03-fn36">36.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See for example Sean Molloy, <span class="italic">The Hidden History of Realism: A Genealogy of Power Politics.</span> New York, Macmillan, 2006.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn37" id="fm03-fn37">37.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Ken Booth, ‘Security in Anarchy: Utopian Realism in Theory and Practice’. <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, 67(3), 527–545, July 1991.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn38" id="fm03-fn38">38.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See my ‘E.H. Carr and Isaac Deutscher: A Very Special Relationship’, in Michael Cox ed; <span class="italic">E.H. Carr: A Critical Appraisal.</span> Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2000.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn39" id="fm03-fn39">39.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See for instance E.H. Carr, ‘The USSR and The West’. <span class="italic">New Left Review,</span> 11, 25–36, September–October 1978.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn40" id="fm03-fn40">40.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Muriel Cozette, ‘Reclaiming the Critical Dimension of Realism: Hans J. Morgenthau and the Ethics of Scholarship’. <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, 34(1), 5–27, 2008; and Milan Babik, ‘Realism as Critical Theory: The International Thought of E.H. Carr’. <span class="italic">International Studies Review</span>, 15(4), 491–514, December 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn41" id="fm03-fn41">41.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See my ‘E.H. Carr and the Crisis of Liberalism’. <span class="italic">Millennium</span>, 38(3), 1–11.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn42" id="fm03-fn42">42.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Pierre Manent, ‘The Crisis of Liberalism’. <span class="italic">Journal of Democracy</span>, 25(1), 131–141, January 2014.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn43" id="fm03-fn43">43.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See George Soros, <span class="italic">The Crisis of Global Capitalism</span>. New York, 1998.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn44" id="fm03-fn44">44.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For a Marxist perspective on the crisis of modern liberalism see Alex Callinicos, <span class="italic">Bonfire of Illusions: The Twin Crises of Liberalism.</span> Cambridge, Polity Press, 2010.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn45" id="fm03-fn45">45.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">James Rosenau, <span class="italic">Turbulence in World Politics: A Theory of World Politics</span>. New Jersey, Princeton University Press, 1990.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn46" id="fm03-fn46">46.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Yanis Varoufakis, <span class="italic">And the Weak Suffer What They Must?</span> London, Bodley Head, 2016.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn47" id="fm03-fn47">47.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">As I argue in my ‘The Uses and Abuses of History: the End of the Cold War and Soviet collapse‘. <span class="italic">International Politics</span>, 48(4–5), 627–646, 2011.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn48" id="fm03-fn48">48.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Chinese writers have displayed an especially great interest in another realist— Thucydides—and another period of power shift leading as Thucydides believed, ‘inevitably’, to war: Thucydides famously wrote in his <span class="italic">History of The Peloponnesian War</span> that <span class="italic">“the real cause”</span> of the war and the <span class="italic">“one which was formally most kept out of sight”</span> was <span class="italic">“the growth of the power of Athens, and the alarm which this inspired in</span> Sparta”. See Mo Shengkai and Chen Yue, ‘The US-China “Thucydides Trap”: A view from Beijing”. <span class="italic">The National Interest</span>, July 10, 2016. <a href="http://nationalinterest.org/feature/the-us-china-thucydides-trap-view-beijing-16903">http://nationalinterest.org/feature/the-us-china-thucydides-trap-view-beijing-16903</a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn49" id="fm03-fn49">49.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Barry Buzan and Michael Cox, ‘China and US: Comparable Cases of the ‘Peaceful Rise’. <span class="italic">The Chinese Journal of International Politics</span>, 6(2), 109–132, 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn50" id="fm03-fn50">50.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Ernest Gellner, ‘Nationalism Reconsidered and E.H. Carr’. <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, 18(4), 285–293, October 1992.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn51" id="fm03-fn51">51.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See also Konstantinos Kostagiannis, ‘Mind the Gap between Nationalism and International Relations: Power and the nation-state in E.H. Carr’s realism’. <span class="italic">International Politics</span>, 50(6), 830–845, 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn52" id="fm03-fn52">52.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Peter Wilson, ‘The New Europe Debate in Wartime Britain’, in <span class="italic">Visions of European Unity</span>, eds; Philomena Murray and Paul Rich. Boulder, CO, Westview Press, 1996, pp. 39–62.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn53" id="fm03-fn53">53.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Konstantinos Kostagiannis and Daniel Kenealy, ‘Realist Visions of the European Union: E.H. Carr and Integration’. <span class="italic">Millennium,</span> 41(2), 221–246, 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn54" id="fm03-fn54">54.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Kaarel Piirimae, <span class="italic">Liberals, Nationalism and Small States: E.H. Carr, Walter Lippmann and the Baltic States, 1918–1944.</span> <a href="https://www.academia.edu/10009761/L%C3%A4%C3%A4ne_liberaalid_rahvuslus_ja_v%C3%A4ikeriigid._E._H._Carri_ja_Walter_Lippmanni_vaated_Balti_riikidele_1918-1944">https://www.academia.edu/10009761/L%C3%A4%C3%A4ne_liberaalid_rahvuslus_ja_v%C3%A4ikeriigid._E._H._Carri_ja_Walter_Lippmanni_vaated_Balti_riikidele_1918-1944</a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn55" id="fm03-fn55">55.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See for instance Kuniyuki Nishimura, ‘E.H. Carr, Dostoevsky and the Problem of Irrationality in Modern Europe’. <span class="italic">International Relations</span>, 25(1), 45–64, March 2011; and his ‘The Age of the Lonely Crowd: E.H. Carr and Peter Drucker on the Fragility pf Modern Life’. <span class="italic">Global Society</span>, 25(3), 2011. See also Sean Molloy, ‘Spinoza, Carr, and the Ethics of the 20 Years’ Crisis‘. <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, 39(2), 251–271, 2013.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#fm03_fn56" id="fm03-fn56">56.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in E.H. Carr’s <span class="italic">What is History?</span></p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>