<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterTitle1">Introduction</p>
<p class="NoIndent">In 1936 Edward Hallett Carr resigned from the Foreign Office where he had worked for the better part of twenty years to take up the position of the Woodrow Wilson Chair in the Department of International Politics at the University College of Wales Aberystwyth. At first sight it was one of the oddest decisions he ever took in an extraordinarily long and very distinguished career. Aberystwyth, after all, was hardly one of the more fashionable universities in the United Kingdom, and West Wales was about as far away as it was possible to be from the centres of political and intellectual power where Carr had hitherto spent nearly all of his life.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn1" id="intro_fn1">1</a> Carr also discovered (just after the interview) that the President of the College – the redoubtable Lord David Davies, whose support for the League of Nations was only equalled by his benevolence in funding the post – was totally opposed to his appointment on the grounds that Carr was both sceptical about the League<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn2" id="intro_fn2">2</a> and critical of the liberal principles enunciated by another, rather more important president, after whom the Chair had originally been named.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn3" id="intro_fn3">3</a> The initial signs were hardly encouraging. But, as the philosophical Carr explained in a letter sent to his publisher (the future Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan), the position did have its advantages. As he pointed out, it was the ‘best’ that there was ‘in the country’ and ‘the obligations of residence’ were ‘extremely small’. It would also give him what he could never have had in the Foreign Office: the freedom ‘to write and lecture on foreign affairs’, something he had ‘long wanted to do’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn4" id="intro_fn4">4</a> This, if nothing else, was the critical attraction of what he later referred to rather puckishly as this ‘fancy chair’ in the people’s College by the sea.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn5" id="intro_fn5">5</a></p>
<p class="para">The unlikely encounter between Carr the cosmopolitan and Aberyst-wyth the university turned out, in fact, to be one of the most productive in academic history. Given the space he craved Carr published not just one book while in the employ of the University of Wales, but no less than seven, a remarkable output even by Carr’s already remarkably productive standards. The first (Carr’s favourite) sank almost without trace, except for that which it left on the anarchist movement.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn6" id="intro_fn6">6</a> The next – a straightforward student text dealing with the international history of the inter-war period – went on to sell well over 70,000 copies.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn7" id="intro_fn7">7</a> It also had the rare privilege of being his only book published in Welsh.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn8" id="intro_fn8">8</a> At least three more, <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace, Nationalism and After</span> and <span class="italic">The Soviet Impact on the Western World</span>, were all best-sellers too,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn9" id="intro_fn9">9</a> especially the first one, which even the normally modest Carr admitted had been ‘a spectacular success’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn10" id="intro_fn10">10</a> Unfortunately, the same could not be said about his earlier and more detailed study on British foreign policy. Published in late 1939 it was more or less still-born.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn11" id="intro_fn11">11</a> The same fate did not await his other volume, however, which appeared at about the same time. Conceived in 1937 with an entirely different title to that which finally appeared on the cover (Carr’s preferred option until he was persuaded otherwise was <span class="italic">Utopia and Reality</span>) it was in the end published – after detailed negotiations between Carr and his publisher – under the name by which it ultimately became internationally famous: <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis: 1919–1939. An Introduction to the Study of International Relations</span>.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn12" id="intro_fn12">12</a></p>
<p class="para">The history of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> is almost as interesting (and perhaps as significant) as the book itself. As his letters and diaries of the time reveal, Carr never intended to write a popular or even an especially accessible study. As he rather nicely put it in 1938, this particular volume was not one that ‘people’ would ‘want to take to the seaside or the mountains with them’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn13" id="intro_fn13">13</a> Nor was it ever written with the mass market in mind, but for what Carr liked to regard as that rather nebulous, but all-important body of human beings known as the intelligent reading public. Indeed, in another communication to Macmillan just after the book was published, he worried that with the onset of the war and the call-up, those for whom the book had originally been intended would not be around to read it.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn14" id="intro_fn14">14</a> He was equally concerned that the new title which he had only agreed with Macmillan a month or so before publication, did not accurately reflect what was in the book itself. A ‘fancy title’ would be inappropriate, he agreed.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn15" id="intro_fn15">15</a> On the other hand, the book was not a ‘bigger and better history of post-war international relations’ (which was implied by <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>) but rather ‘about international relations in general’<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn16" id="intro_fn16">16</a> and while he conceded (reluctantly) that <span class="italic">Utopia and Reality</span> might be too ‘abstract’, he was always anxious that the final alternative did not give a clear enough indication of what was actually in the volume itself. In terms of sales at least he need not have worried. Under its new and more popular heading, it sold extremely well and was widely reviewed, a fact that pleased the cautious but quietly confident Carr no end.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn17" id="intro_fn17">17</a> The book, he was happy to report to his College back in Wales in 1943, had achieved ‘substantial success’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn18" id="intro_fn18">18</a> This not only prompted Macmillan to bring out a new second edition in 1946, but also led to its speedy translation into two foreign languages, to be followed by several more in the years which followed.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn19" id="intro_fn19">19</a> Whether Carr had intended it or not, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> had become an academic best-seller.</p>
<p class="para">What Carr could never have anticipated, of course, was the book’s subsequent influence and minor cult-like status within the new academic discipline of international relations, a subject for which he appeared to have very little enthusiasm at all. Indeed, one of the many ironies of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> is that its author not only demonstrated little interest in its subsequent fate, but showed even less in the discipline which now claimed the book as one of its classical texts. Clearly this had something to do with his post-war preoccupation; writing a massive history of early Soviet Russia. Yet, as the record shows, his indifference was not just because he had changed academic trains. He also had grave doubts about the subject itself. As he explained in 1971 to an American admirer, he had ‘long thought that International Relations’ was a ‘rag-bag’ into which one was ‘entitled to put anything one pleases’, and that the various attempts to ‘turn it into some sort of organzied self-contained subject’ had ended in ‘fiasco’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn20" id="intro_fn20">20</a> A few years later and he was saying much the same to another American, the distinguished American academic Stanley Hoffman. If anything he was more hostile, and even attacked his own role in having inadvertently helped establish the subject. ‘Whatever my share in starting this business’ (this ‘business’ being international relations), ‘I do not know that I am particularly proud of it’. Anyway, he asked, what is this thing called international relations in the ‘English speaking countries’ other than the ‘study’ about how ‘to run the world from positions of strength’? In other places, at other times, it might be something else, but within those states which had the influence – as opposed to those that did not – it was little more than a rationalization for the exercise of power by the dominant nations over the weak. There was no ‘science of international relations’ he went on. The subject so-called was an ideology of control masking as a proper academic discipline.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn21" id="intro_fn21">21</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr’s hostility to international relations could not, however, alter the course of academic history, and whether he liked it or not, his apparently unloved child, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, went on to play a quite crucial role in both launching the subject and influencing the way in which generations of students were taught to think about its history. For in spite of what Carr may have intended when he wrote the book, those who came to read it later – and in particular during the dark, dangerous days of the Cold War – came to regard it as a classic ‘realist’ text which condemned any talk of ethics or morals and saw all international politics as a simple struggle for power between competitive states in an unchanging international system.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn22" id="intro_fn22">22</a> This one-sided reading of what was a much more nuanced text, subtly but effectively transformed <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> from what Carr had originally set out to do – which was to debunk the pretensions of liberalism while providing a way out of the impasse that was the inter-war crisis – and make it into something rather conservative and simple. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was not exactly turned into its opposite. On the other hand, it was stripped bare of any critical edge. This did not necessarily make it the least understood book in the history of international relations. But it definitely came close. Certainly, it was never read with any great care, particularly by those who seemed more intent on legitimizing a particular way of thinking about the world rather than studying what Carr actually said.</p>
<p class="para">However, before going on to look at the very peculiar fate that awaited <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, it would be useful first to return to Carr’s original decision to leave the relative security of the Foreign Office to take up that position in that distant university department. We do not do so out of a deference to history – though the history itself is not without its own fascination – but to understand why it was that Carr needed the freedom he so obviously craved to speak out on the major issues of the day. Indeed, only by examining the background to that otherwise odd decision (at least one of his colleagues took it for granted that he had been offered a Chair in Oxford<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn23" id="intro_fn23">23</a>) can we really begin to understand why he decided to write <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in the first place. Books after all do not appear out of thin air, and this particularly influential book, which took him the best part of two years to write, can only be understood if we enter into Carr’s world, a world that stood in ruins long before he took the critical decision to depart the Foreign Office and write the study which finally established his reputation as a major thinker of the first order.</p>
<p class="header1" id="int-head1">E. H. Carr: the unmaking of a liberal</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Our story begins not with Carr the newly created professor (a term by the way that he heartily disliked) but Carr the committed liberal whose early world was marked by certainty and security – ‘security not only in family relations but in a sense of scarcely imaginable today’ he later wrote. As he himself confessed, he grew up in an entirely sheltered environment of public school, Cambridge and the Foreign Office; in a place and time that was ‘solid and stable’, where prices remained the same, where everybody knew their station in life, in which things only changed slowly, and then only for the ‘better’. Even the shock of the First World War and the Bolshevik revolution did little to disturb this equilibrium. The war was a tragedy that destroyed the lives of millions, but, as he recalled, few people at the time ‘thought of it as the end of an epoch’. Instead they regarded it, or at least he did, as some ‘unpredictable natural calamity’ that once over and the damage repaired would leave things more or less as they were before. The same seemed to be true of the Russian revolution. Carr was not foolish enough to think that the new regime would collapse at the very first hint of opposition and resistance, the standard view after 1917. But he never felt that this utopian experiment with what he felt were its unrealizable goals of creating a classless society,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn24" id="intro_fn24">24</a> and spreading proletarian international revolution,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn25" id="intro_fn25">25</a> would ever amount to very much. No doubt for this reason, although there were others, he did not so much fear the Bolsheviks during the first decade of their rule as feel indifferent to them. As he admitted, until the late 1920s and early 1930s he did ‘not give much thought’ to what was happening in the USSR. It was, to paraphrase a term used about another country at another time, a faraway place about which he knew something including the language but did not care a great deal.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn26" id="intro_fn26">26</a></p>
<p class="para">The first seeds of doubt were sown with the Versailles Peace Treaty in 1919, a key historical event which he attended and in which he played a minor role, primarily dealing with the question of minorities in Central Europe.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn27" id="intro_fn27">27</a> The big question, however, was what to do with Germany. Carr was by no means na tve There were critical issues that had to be addressed. Nevertheless, these could not be dealt with seriously, and over the long term by punishing the whole nation, and then treating it as a permanent pariah. If nothing else, this made little sense economically, a view he shared with John Maynard Keynes from whom he derived most of his thoughts about the disastrous ‘economic consequences of the peace’. It was also bound to store up major problems for the future. Moreover, it was unjust, a common opinion amongst a generation of British intellectuals at the time, including Carr himself who battled long and hard within the Foreign Office to get his position accepted. In the end he failed and, as we now know, felt compelled to resign in order to be able to speak out in public. Nor did his views on the subject change much thereafter, in spite of what happened in 1939 and the failure of appeasement as a policy. As a close confidante remarked many years after his death, Carr never had any real sympathy for Hitler. Nonetheless, he always thought Versailles to have been little short of disastrous and a major factor in both bringing Hitler to power in 1933 and causing the war a few years later.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn28" id="intro_fn28">28</a></p>
<p class="para">If the harsh treatment meted out to Germany in 1919 was one of the reasons for Carr’s growing disillusionment, the entry of the United States onto the world’s diplomatic stage at Versailles was undoubtedly another. Carr was not especially anti-American.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn29" id="intro_fn29">29</a> However, he was anti-Woodrow Wilson, and it was his critical engagement with this particular President’s brand of crusading politics that raised serious doubts in his own mind about both liberalism as a doctrine and Wilsonianism as a guide to international politics. His hostility to Wilson in particular (which David Davies could never quite forgive)<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn30" id="intro_fn30">30</a> derived from two main sources: a disdain for Wilson’s high-sounding moral rhetoric, which Carr regarded as little more than an idealistic fig-leaf masking America’s ambition of extending its own influence at the expense of others; and a more principled opposition to Wilson’s use of the slogan of the right of national self-determination. Carr was no lover of empires as such. On the other hand, he could detect nothing particularly progressive arising from their collapse in Eastern Europe. Furthermore, as he repeatedly pointed out, the proliferation of a host of small European states in the inter-war period could only add to an already highly unstable international situation. No great fan of small states at the best of times, he soon came to believe that one of the additional reasons for the crisis between the wars was the highly irresponsible way in which the liberal ideal of national self-determination had been applied in 1919. As he noted ‘national self-determination was a principle’ that not only had ‘awkward implications for bourgeois democracy’ but for ‘international concord’ as well.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn31" id="intro_fn31">31</a> Potentially progressive in its consequences at an earlier period in time, its results could only be destructive and reactionary after the First World War, turning it from a source of potential liberation from oppression in one age, to what Carr termed the ‘world’s bane’ in another.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn32" id="intro_fn32">32</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr’s faith in liberalism, however, received its greatest blow from the collapse of the world economy after 1929. In this he was by no means unique but representative of what happened to a whole generation. Yet, once detached from his moorings there seemed to be no going back. ‘England’ and the world along with it ‘was adrift’, he wrote in 1930, and unless a new ‘faith’ could be found there was little hope for the future.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn33" id="intro_fn33">33</a> He found his faith, of course, in social reform and economic planning, as he made clear to an audience at Chatham House a decade later. There could be no return to an economic order that had so obviously failed. What was now needed, he continued, was not some tinkering with the international superstructure (the basic weakness of such schemes as the League of Nations), but a social revolution from below that would attack the underlying source of the current disorder: namely, the unregulated and unplanned character of a liberal economy which presupposed that the hidden hand of the market would invariably lead to the greatest economic good always being achieved for the greatest number. Such an outlook may have made perfect sense in the nineteenth century in a period of expansion: it made none whatsoever in an era of capitalist decline.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn34" id="intro_fn34">34</a> As he explained in a later memo, private enterprise in the past had not just rested on a number of economic assumptions but a set of ‘moral principles’ as well. Now all that had changed, leaving the system that had once ‘enjoyed general assent’ standing indicted before the bar of history.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn35" id="intro_fn35">35</a> The task, therefore, was clear: to find an alternative, or what Carr termed a ‘new society based on new social and economic foundations’ whose first objective would be to promote full employment, equality and social justice. Without such a programme of radical change, the world in general, and Britain in particular, would continue to drift.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn36" id="intro_fn36">36</a></p>
<p class="para">If the trauma of the Depression disturbed Carr, what unsettled him even more was the contrast between what he now saw happening in the West and what he began to see taking place in the Soviet Union. No great supporter of the regime in its earlier, more revolutionary days, the coincidence of the capitalist crisis and the apparent successes being enjoyed by the Five Year Plans after 1929 compelled him to rethink his views.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn37" id="intro_fn37">37</a> This in part was facilitated by his growing love affair with Russian culture more generally.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn38" id="intro_fn38">38</a> Indeed, it was his work on such nineteenth-century figures as Dostoevsky, Herzen and Bakunin (alienated intellectuals who lived ‘outside’ of what Carr called ‘the charmed circle’) that initially led him to think more critically about what he called ‘western ideology’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn39" id="intro_fn39">39</a> But this was only a precipitating factor. More important by far was what was happening within the USSR itself as it moved from the relative quiet of the 1920s to the hectic drive for modernization that characterized the 1930s. Carr never became an apologist for Stalin or the Soviet Union. On one particularly famous occasion he was even moved to observe that Germany under Hitler ‘was almost a free country’ by comparison with its totalitarian counterpart to the East. But he always retained what he liked to think of as balance, and consequently felt that in spite of everything it was still important to recognize the advances that were being made at the economic level.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn40" id="intro_fn40">40</a> This did not make the USSR a socialist society. Neither did it make it a natural ally of the West. But one could not close one’s eyes to what was going on, and no amount of theoretical criticism from classical liberal economists like von Mises or Hayek could alter the fact that under conditions of planning things were being successfully undertaken that were not being done in the West – and the West could only ignore all this at its peril.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn41" id="intro_fn41">41</a></p>
<p class="para">Finally, as an increasingly unsettled intellectual, Carr was bound to be influenced by new ideas, and as one set of truths collapsed he logically began to look around for another with which to make sense of a world in crisis. Not surprisingly, in the context of the 1930s, this led him to engage more seriously with Marx and Marxism. The outcome was a complex amalgam that managed to combine his own elitist scepticism about socialism and doubts about many aspects of Marxism (including the labour theory of value and the notion of class struggle) with something that could loosely be described as being radical and materialistic without ever being properly defined as Marxist itself. It was by no means a straightforward or happy marriage, as his own rather odd biography of Marx demonstrated.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn42" id="intro_fn42">42</a> Yet even this study demonstrated his respect for Marx as a social scientist and theorist of capitalist crisis.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn43" id="intro_fn43">43</a> Carr was equally impressed by certain writers who had been influenced by Marx without necessarily being Marxist themselves, especially the sociologist Karl Mannheim and the radical theologian Reinhold Niebuhr.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn44" id="intro_fn44">44</a> There is no doubt that Carr studied both in depth, and the two together obviously exerted what Carr later agreed was the ‘strongest influence’ possible ‘upon his thinking’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn45" id="intro_fn45">45</a> Perhaps for this reason, amongst others, he confessed that although his 1939 study was ‘not exactly a Marxist work’, it was nonetheless ‘strongly impregnated with Marxist ways of thinking, applied to international affairs’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn46" id="intro_fn46">46</a></p>
<p class="header1" id="int-head2">Constructing a classic: <span class="boldItalic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The world that Carr had known therefore was in turmoil and in many ways <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> gave expression to this. As someone later remarked, while Carr’s classic might have had some important things to say about international relations in general, it was very much marked by the ‘diseased situation’ during which it was been conceived.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn47" id="intro_fn47">47</a> Certainly, Carr’s analysis of why there was a crisis was never entirely consistent.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn48" id="intro_fn48">48</a> At times he seemed to lay most of the blame on liberalism itself, at others on the quality of western diplomacy, occasionally on the selfishness of what he called the ‘have powers’ and their refusal to contemplate any change in the status quo, sometimes on the economic collapse of the 1930s, and by implication on the fundamental contradiction of maintaining any form of equilibrium in an international system composed of nation-states. As such <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> combined both sharp analysis and acid condemnation in equal measure, which not surprisingly made Carr more than a few enemies. The volume also represented a very special kind of intervention into the foreign policy debates of the day in which Carr had already been closely involved while in the Foreign Office. Carr, to be fair, never sought to hide his views nor apologize for the fact that he favoured some form of détente with Germany. However, he did not do so for the normal conservative anti-Soviet reasons that favoured Germany as the best bulwark against communism, but because he felt that there was really no serious alternative. As a declining power Britain, he believed, faced one of two imperfect choices in an imperfect world: either to oppose any alteration within the European status quo and thus run the risk of war with a potentially superior enemy at a time when neither the United States nor the USSR could be counted upon,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn49" id="intro_fn49">49</a> or to accept the necessity and inevitability of some measured change, and having come to that conclusion, seriously engage with Germany in order to bring it about by peaceful means. The tragedy was that it did neither. The result was disastrous. Unwilling or unable to fight a war or even prepare for one, Britain was compelled to retreat and by so doing fed the dangerous illusion in Germany that it could continue to expand with impunity. By then failing to accept that the status quo was in need of adjustment, and that Germany did in fact have legitimate grievances, British policy-makers only managed to annoy the Germans and exacerbate rather than improve relations between the two countries.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn50" id="intro_fn50">50</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr’s immediate reason for writing <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, therefore, was a most practical one. But he also saw himself engaged in something far more important than a mere defence of appeasement (the underlying purpose of the chapter on ‘peaceful change’) or in attacking an increasingly redundant liberalism and certain liberal writers whose only function it seemed was to provide him with a steady supply of ready-made targets which he could then shoot down at regular intervals. His aim, essentially, was to write a more philosophical work that reflected on the nature of knowledge itself and the relationship between different types of knowledge on the one hand, and history and the production of ideas on the other. This is why his original title for the book – <span class="italic">Utopia and Reality</span> – was so significant. He was adamant. He was not attempting to publish a more detailed or higher level version of his already popular international history published in 1937. Nor was he interested in writing something on British foreign policy and its failures. What he was seeking to do was something else: to explore the interplay between the world as understood by those whom he defined in a fairly loose sense as ‘utopians’ – a miscellaneous group whose only uniting feature was a desire to project their own thoughts about the world on to the world itself – and those whom he called ‘realists’, whose chief defining characteristic was an empirical approach to the world as it was. According to Carr, utopianism and realism not only represented ‘two methods of approach’ but also determined ‘opposite attitudes towards every political problem’. Thus the utopian, he asserted, was voluntarist, the realist determinist. The utopian made political theory a norm to which political practice ought to conform, the realist regarded political theory as a sort of codification of political practice. Utopianism attracted intellectuals, realism the bureaucrat. The utopian believed in reason, the realist in force. Utopianism was a trait normally (but not always) associated with the radical, realism with the conservative. Finally, and most fundamental of all, the antithesis of utopia and reality was rooted in a different conception of the relationship of politics and ethics. Hence, the utopian would set up an ethical standard which purported to be independent of politics and sought to make politics conform to it. The realist insisted that morality was a function of politics. In fact, whereas the utopian assumed that there was a general morality and a universal standard by which we could judge what was either right and good, the realist believed that there were no absolute standards save that of fact, and that morality therefore could only be relative and not universal. Viewed from this perspective the search for ethical standards outside of time and place was itself utopian and was thus doomed to frustration.</p>
<p class="para">Why Carr began a book on international relations in this particular way is not at first sight obvious. Nor is it clear initially why he spent the time he did discussing something of which he was so critical as utopianism. Yet as the study proceeds along its extraordinarily erudite way,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn51" id="intro_fn51">51</a> the reason for opening with a rather abstract discussion about one particular way of viewing the world starts to make more sense. As Carr suggests in the early stage of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> (and as he made clear when he was writing the book), this particular volume was going to be a discussion of what he called ‘fundamental trends in international politics’ and not some ‘topical’ work simply dealing with the current situation.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn52" id="intro_fn52">52</a> It was thus necessary to start not with the immediate crisis but with what he hoped would be a more profound assessment of its underlying causes, one central part of which in his view was the failure of both intellectuals and policymakers alike to understand the world around them. The question was, why? It was at this point that he turned to the issue of utopianism and the unfortunate influence which he felt it had exerted on the new science of international relations in the period immediately after the First World War.</p>
<p class="para">According to Carr, international relations in its early incarnation bore the birthmark associated with its ethical origins. This was quite understandable. After all, the war had been a human catastrophe and it was not surprising that those involved in international politics hoped to avoid another war by promoting peace and the institutions associated with peace, especially that most moral of institutions with which the subject in its initial manifestation was to become so inextricably entangled, the League of Nations. But the problem with this approach was obvious: it substituted prescription for analysis while doing little to help explain the causes of peace, or why certain states, and not others, acted in a manner deemed to be aggressive. It also led to an almost complete disregard for power and the role played by power in international affairs. Assuming as they did that there was an international community, and that reason rather than material and military capabilities governed the actions of states, the utopians floundered around in a world of ‘make believe’ made up of firm resolutions passed by the League of Nations against war but very little else. This made very little difference in the 1920s, when the world was still relatively orderly. It made a great deal, however, after the critical year of 1931 when Japan invaded Manchuria, followed two years later by the rise of Hitler. Now, tired old legalistic slogans about peace and obedience to international law sounded like so much hot air as the revisionist states began to challenge the status quo favoured, not surprisingly, by the remaining democracies in Europe and the European colonial powers in Asia.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn53" id="intro_fn53">53</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr’s opening move therefore made it possible for him to develop what he hoped would be a theoretically more persuasive analysis of the crisis by showing the extent to which it was being determined by the changing distribution of power in the international system. What it also permitted him to do was draw what seemed on the surface to be a very sharp distinction between one approach, which he saw as being flawed, and another which he did not. But this distinction turned out to be more apparent than real.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn54" id="intro_fn54">54</a> Hence, while Carr at the beginning painted a rather black and white picture of two modes of thinking, placing himself not surprisingly in the intellectually superior realist category, as his discussion moved forward this early picture of hostile camps composed of aspirational utopians on the one side and cynical realists on the other, began to give way to something rather more subtle and blurred. In fact, as the book more generally wended its complicated way from early thoughts about the new science of international relations to complex assessments about the role of power and morality, all that originally seemed fixed and well-defined began to assume a rather different shape and form.</p>
<p class="para">The first complication was introduced by Carr himself. Having set up his ideal types he then sought to muddy the waters by implying that these twin poles were not opposites at all, but merely two sides of the same intellectual coin. Indeed, as his analysis unfolds, it becomes increasingly clear that Carr neither favours realism in its pure form nor even thinks that such a thing is possible or even desirable.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn55" id="intro_fn55">55</a> Hence, while he accepts that realism is a necessary corrective to what he calls the exuberance of utopianism, realism without purpose, he argues, is nothing more than ‘the thought of old age’. Then, as if to make the point clearer than the truth, he devotes a whole chapter to exploring the limits of realism, and while we are left in little doubt where Carr’s intellectual sympathies still lie, he is quite clear in his own mind that realism alone cannot provide a complete basis for effective political thinking. In the end, it is only by drawing upon the visionary aspects of utopianism and the analytical tough-mindedness of realism, that one will be able to develop what Carr refers to as ‘sound political thought and a sound political life’.</p>
<p class="para">But this in turn raises a much larger question: what precisely did Carr actually understand by realism? The answer is by no means obvious. For having at one point implied that ‘realism’ was more likely to appeal to the conservative rather than the radical, he then cited a whole list of modern realists who were not conservative at all. This included a number of German thinkers, including Hegel – from whom he drew much intellectual inspiration – Marx and Engels, whom he cited on several occasions, and Lenin, whom he quoted favourably at a number of points. This was hardly the most obvious combination of well-known conservative thinkers. But then Carr did not see modern realism as being an especially conservative methodology. On the contrary, it was in his view a ‘progressive’, even subversive outlook that understood all phenomena not as the expression of some general essence standing outside of time but as something historically specific. As Carr observed in a famous section of the book entitled the ‘relativity of thought’, the supreme virtue of realism was that it allowed the realist to demonstrate that the intellectual theories and ethical principles of one age were all historically conditioned. It also allowed the contemporary realist like Carr to expose the fact – which was critical in terms of his attack on the utopians – that the various ideas of any individual or particular group like the utopians (such as peace and law and order) were not just neutral notions, but rather the expressions of specific interests; and the most urgent task of realism, he went on, was ‘to bring down the whole cardboard structure of utopian thought by exposing the hollowness of the material’ out of which it was built. Only when this had been accomplished, could we begin the task of finding a way out of the current impasse in which the world now found itself.</p>
<p class="para">If Carr had a particular understanding of realism he had an almost unique notion of what constituted utopianism. For in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> he did not employ it to refer to those who contemplated the possibility of an alternative society somewhere, at some point, in the future. Instead, the utopians of whom he spoke had no vision about the future at all, but rather hung on to an outmoded set of liberal ideals whose principal claim, according to Carr, was that there existed a basic ‘harmony of interests’ which tried to turn competitive states into members of the same international community. This, he believed, was a simple denial of the basic facts of life in the real world. It was also politically disingenuous. After all, if there was such a ‘harmony’ then clearly those who questioned it were by definition trouble-makers, while those who defended it were by implication the peace-makers. But then what was this ideology of ‘harmony’ other than an ideology justifying a status quo, founded upon a vast inequality of power between the different states? Furthermore, as he pointed out, the utopians so-called did not protest too loudly when the victorious powers imposed their own very harsh peace on the defeated in 1919. However, they made an enormous amount of noise when the ‘have-not’ powers began to strike back a few years later. This not only smacked of gross hypocrisy, it was also very dangerous for it led to an uncritical support of a situation that was neither defensible not legitimate. Some means would have to be found therefore to permit significant reform to the international system. If not, there could only be one outcome – and that outcome would be war.</p>
<p class="para">The issue of reform then led Carr to look at the problem of ‘peaceful change’. He opened his analysis with a discussion of law, treaties and the judicial settlement of international disputes. Given his own outlook, it was hardly surprising that he dealt with each in a way that was least likely to please those who talked rather too easily in his view about the rule of law, the sanctity of treaties, and about the imperative need to resolve international disputes through the various bodies set up under the terms of the League of Nations. Not only did fine words and worthy bodies do little to resolve the outstanding issues; they actually made them worse by fostering the illusion that deep problems could be solved through an appeal to something which did not exist – that is, an international community composed of a society of states who all shared the same goals. This was a chimera and would do nothing to address the underlying causes of conflict which were rooted in the unequal distribution of power. Nor in some ways should one try to arbitrate, for the purpose of arbitration through law was not to change things, but to keep them the way they were. Thus what was required was not some recourse to supranational bodies or courts which had neither the legitimacy nor the power to enforce their decisions, but an honest recognition of the supremacy of politics. Indeed, only by recognizing that all conflicts were ultimately about politics and about the fundamental problem of who gets what, where and when, could one even begin to tackle the problems of the day.</p>
<p class="para">From this assumption Carr drew two important conclusions. The first was that change was both natural and necessary: the task therefore was to ensure that it occured peacefully rather than violently. The second was an acceptance that all change in the end was a function of power rather than morality, and that it was pointless and dangerous standing against the tide of history if the conditions of power determined it. This is why it was essential to concede (up to a point) to the rising power that was Germany. Yet even short-term concessions would not begin to answer the biggest question of all: namely, what sort of international order was required to achieve genuine security over the longer term? Here Carr looked back in order to look forward, and the picture he painted of the future went much further than that ever contemplated by his more utopian enemies.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn56" id="intro_fn56">56</a> Two reforms of the most basic character were required, he believed – one that would have to tackle the problem of the nation-state, and the other the structure of the international economy. The two issues were intimately connected. Hence if the new world was to be a more peaceful place then it was essential to develop an entirely different approach to economics, and if it was to be more prosperous then it could only become so if people were prepared to rethink the notion of sovereignty, and perhaps, in time, the idea of the nation itself. One thing was clear, however. Liberal schemes with their conceptions of a world federation or blueprints of a more perfect League of Nations would not suffice. These neither attacked the deeper sources of the disorder nor provided any serious solution to the dilemmas facing humanity on the eve of the Second World War. When, and only when policy-makers looked beyond these elegant superstructural answers and began digging in the foundations of the international system, could there be serious historical progress. But, as Carr concluded, this remedy, though utopian at one level, was profoundly realistic at another, for instead of being imposed on history, it grew out of existing historical trends. This is what made his vision of a ‘new international order’ as opposed to that which had been proposed in 1919, a real possibility.</p>
<p class="header1" id="int-head3">Liberal critics: Carr’s response</p>
<p class="NoIndent">As Carr anticipated, the appearance of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> set off a lively and, in some cases, an increasingly bitter discussion amongst those against whom the book had been aimed. It might have helped his case if he had completed his project just a little earlier, but by the time it appeared Britain was at war, and part of his argument about the need to come to terms with Germany had been rendered obsolete by the march of events. Carr, typically, accepted the judgement passed by history – the ‘world’s only reliable court’ he once observed, quoting Hegel – and within weeks had thrown himself into the war effort, no doubt tinged by some regret that the peaceful change he had argued for had finally given way to a conflict he had hoped might be avoided. Whether he was quite so shocked by what happened as he later seemed to imply was not so clear at the time.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn57" id="intro_fn57">57</a> In many respects, he had already come to the unpalatable conclusion that there was no possibility of accommodating Germany. He made the point abundantly clear in fact in his other book published at about the same time. Begun in late 1938 and completed by the end of June 1939, this hard-hitting study pulled very few punches in its defence of appeasement. Carr even spared more than a few positive words for the much criticized Neville Chamberlain whose policy of ‘realism’ he believed was preferable to the wavering course which had been pursued by his predecessors. Yet Carr was never a blind enthusiast, and by March and April 1939 he realized that the game was up. War was now inevitable, more or less, and the nation had to prepare for the long struggle that lay ahead fought on the traditional British principle of preventing what even the normally diplomatic Carr defined as the ‘brutal domination’ of the continent by a ‘single overwhelming Power’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn58" id="intro_fn58">58</a> The pity, according to Carr, was that having accepted the logic of their own situation by early 1939, British policy-makers did not then do more to secure the one alliance that might have made the war less likely or at least less costly: that which he was now advocating with Stalin’s Russia.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn59" id="intro_fn59">59</a></p>
<p class="para">These events, and Carr’s speedy return to London to work initially for the Ministry of Information, and then as Assistant Editor for The Times, did not prevent him from keeping an eye on the fate of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Too much effort had gone into the book for it now to be ignored. Certainly, it did not lack for admirers. The reviewer in the <span class="italic">Times Literary Supplement</span>, for instance, accepted that even though it was a highly ‘provocative’ volume, there was no doubting that it was a ‘profound’ work whose author should be praised for his ‘fresh and fearless thinking’. Writing under an assumed name, the up and coming Labour politician, Richard Crossman, was equally impressed. Carr’s analysis of the utopians, in particular, was a ‘brilliant success’ and exposed the ‘enervating impact’ which their ideas had had upon the victorious Powers who, instead of using their power in defence of the status quo or for the accomplishment of peaceful change, had engaged in what Crossman called ‘unilateral psychological disarmament’. The American historian, William Maddox, was even more fulsome in his praise. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, he opined, was nothing less than a ‘monument to the human power of sane and detached analysis’ that provided a discussion of the ‘collapse of the international system’ that was entirely ‘devoid of national bias’; there was little question in his mind at least that ‘Professor Carr’ had ‘produced one of the most significant contributions to the systematic study of the theory of international politics’ that he had ‘seen in years’. Another American reviewer agreed and conceded that this ‘professor of international politics’ from Aberystwyth in Wales had written a ‘very forthright’ study. Americans would be especially interested, he thought, in Carr’s tough assessment of Woodrow Wilson, and while careful not to endorse Carr’s critique completely, he hinted strongly that the discerning would find his ‘withering criticism’ of the crusading President particularly ‘stimulating’. The noted sociologist and future theorist of revolutions, Crane Brinton, was equally impressed, though he went on to warn the many US readers of the popular <span class="italic">Saturday Review</span> that ‘when British academic liberals’ (by whom he meant Carr) ‘begin to go hardboiled, we are entitled to think that something is about to happen’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn60" id="intro_fn60">60</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr was more than a little gratified by these initial comments and like any normal author hoped that these favourable reviews would have a positive impact on sales.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn61" id="intro_fn61">61</a> Not that he had very much time himself to reflect on these things. The war had changed everything and the principal task now he felt was not to look back on a crisis that had finally been resolved, but to work out the most effective ways possible of integrating British war aims with its plans for the peace. On one issue, however, he was insistent: that it was necessary to learn the lessons of the past and abandon any faith in those various grand plans that had come to nothing after the First World War. It was also critical that the war should not just be fought on a moral platform alone with the simple ‘negative’ aim of destroying ‘Hitlerism’. This would neither mobilize the people nor provide them with a vision for the future. If the war was to be fought at all – and fought successfully – it would have to be conducted in the form of what Carr called a ‘social war’ against privilege and inequality. Politically this was critical. It was also essential if the Allies wanted to ‘stir up discontent in the conquered countries against the Nazi yoke’; and they were ‘much more likely to’ achieve this ‘by holding out the prospect of bread and butter than by promises of freedom and self-determination’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn62" id="intro_fn62">62</a></p>
<p class="para">While Carr reflected on the future, his many critics contemplated their next move. One such was the Director of Studies at Chatham House, Arnold Toynbee, one of Carr’s main targets.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn63" id="intro_fn63">63</a> Toynbee fully accepted the power of Carr’s polemic against good liberals like himself. But, he wondered, had not this ‘consummate debunker’ been thoroughly ‘debunked by the war itself’? Moreover, no amount of clever intellectual footwork from the admittedly brilliant author of this ‘very important contribution to the study of recent international affairs’ could disguise the fact that there was a profound ‘moral vacuum’ at the heart of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Criticism was all very well, but unless it led ‘to a clearer view of what’ was ‘morally right and morally wrong’ it would in the end lead nowhere. This particular theme was taken up and developed by yet another of Carr’s known political enemies, Alfred Zimmern, the first holder of the Woodrow Wilson Chair and now Montagu Burton Professor of International Relations at Oxford. He too was disturbed by Carr’s lack of moral compass. Carr was a ‘thorough-going relativist’, he concluded, who had no way of knowing, or even judging, what was good or bad, right or wrong or plain indifferent. And if there were no such objective standards, he asked, then how could anybody, including Carr, arrive at any reasoned judgement about the world?</p>
<p class="para">One of Carr’s many other targets, the well-known liberal theorist, Norman Angell, was even more outraged. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, he felt, was as ‘completely mischievous a piece of sophisticated moral nihilism’ as he had ever read. Angell agreed that Carr had forced his opponents (including himself) ‘to take stock’. But what was one supposed to make of a book which assumed that law, order, and peace were not general interests but simply the particular interests of the rich and the powerful? Ultimately, all that Carr had done, and presumably done quite consciously, was to provide ‘aid and comfort in about equal degree’ to the followers of Karl Marx and Adolf Hitler. The Fabian critic, Leonard Woolf, was equally incensed, but expressed himself in a slightly less intemperate way. However, instead of attacking Carr where others had already attacked him before (on the twin issues of relativism and morality) he decided to interrogate what he regarded as Carr’s misuse of the concept of utopianism. In Woolf’s view Carr never employed the term with any great degree of consistency. Nor did he once think that the same criticism that he had levelled against others might also be levelled against him. Yet if it was legitimate to label as ‘utopian’ all those who had supported the League, then was it not equally reasonable to attack Chamberlain for being a utopian as well? After all, his policy of appeasement was no more successful at stopping the slide towards war than the League but Carr never lambasted him with the same degree of fervour that he had reserved for his liberal opponents. This not only smacked of hypocrisy but pointed to a basic flaw in Carr’s logic, one that he could never admit to of course, because in the end he was guilty of the same inconsistency himself.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn64" id="intro_fn64">64</a></p>
<p class="para">Faced with such a barrage of criticism Carr did not respond directly. To that extent there was no great debate between Carr the ‘realist’ and his ‘idealist’ critics.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn65" id="intro_fn65">65</a> What he did do, was to write yet another book, and while it did not represent a ‘reply’ in any formal sense, it was obvious that part of the reason for publishing <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace</span> in 1942 was because he had been stung by the various attacks launched by critics. Carr indeed admitted as much a few years later. As he put it, he began to feel ‘a little ashamed of the harsh realism of The 20 Years’ Crisis’, and so decided ‘to write’ what he called ‘the highly utopian <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace</span>’. Admittedly, it was not one of Carr’s more profound studies (he wrote it just under a year). On the other hand, it was by no means as ‘feeble’ as he claimed.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn66" id="intro_fn66">66</a> Nor was the intellectual distance between it and his previous book as great as one of his reviewers seemed to suggest.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn67" id="intro_fn67">67</a> It addressed the same broad issue: the crisis of the old order. It was equally negative in its evaluation of liberalism. It was vituperative against Wilson. And it did at least try to explain why the ‘dissatisfied’ powers like Germany had been so dissatisfied and why the satisfied powers after 1919 like Britain had been the authors of so much of their own undoing in the 1930s. It also happened to cite <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> on at least one occasion,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn68" id="intro_fn68">68</a> and was attacked in an equally vituperative way by critics, though this time not for its relativism so much as its indifference to the fate of small nations and overly friendly attitude towards the Soviet Union. One politician was even led to the rather apocalyptic conclusion that with the publication of <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace</span> Carr had become ‘an active danger to the country’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn69" id="intro_fn69">69</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr’s other response to <span class="italic">The Twenty Year’s Crisis</span> was less to his various critics and more to what he saw as an unresolved tension in the book. As he later noted, he had in 1939 hovered between two positions which he had never quite resolved in his own mind: one which continued to insist that the nation-state would still remain the principal unit of the international system, and another which hinted (no more) that there could be no sense of order within that system so long as the nation-state remained in being.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn70" id="intro_fn70">70</a> A series of events in the meantime, including the experience of wartime planning and further reflection on the future of Europe, had resolved that contradiction. By 1945 he had thus arrived at the conclusion that not only was the small nation-state an impediment standing in the way of international stability and prosperity, but so too was the nation-state more generally. In the past, he had, he confessed, ‘too readily’ and ‘too complacently’ accepted the ‘existing nation-state, (large and small)’ as the basic unit of ‘international society’. By the time the war had come to an end he had arrived at a very different answer to his original question about how to organize the new international order. Indeed, if there was to be one at all, it was absolutely vital to think of security less in terms of nations and more in terms of meeting those most basic of human rights such as freedom from fear, from want and from unemployment, rights that transcended boundaries and united peoples whatever their nationality. Carr had few illusions about how difficult it would be to arrive at such a ‘utopian’ solution. Nonetheless, it would in his view be ‘an illusion’ to think that security could be attained through the vehicle of the nation-state. It would be equally na tve to suppose that the growing and irresistible demand for social justice could be attained by returning to the ‘free’ international economy of the nineteenth century. If mankind was to learn from the past, it had to face up to the simple truth that nineteenth-century solutions were not enough in the modern age; and if history taught anything, it was that ‘old traditions’ would ‘have to be discarded’ and ‘new ones created before Europe and the world’ could ‘recover their balance in the aftermath of the age of nationalism’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn71" id="intro_fn71">71</a></p>
<p class="header1" id="int-head4">Mr Carr goes to Washington</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The publication of <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span> marked the beginning of an important transitional period in Carr’s already hectic life. In 1945 he signed yet another contract with Macmillan, this time to publish a major study on the History of Soviet Russia, though little anticipating that it would take him over thirty years to complete.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn72" id="intro_fn72">72</a> A year later he brought out two more books, one a partially (but controversially) revised edition of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> itself, and the other a relatively short and popular study entitled <span class="italic">The Soviet Impact on the Western World</span>, possibly his most pro-Soviet volume to date which contained what even Carr later agreed were a few ‘exaggerations’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn73" id="intro_fn73">73</a> In 1947 he then resigned his position at Aberystwyth. Thereafter, he held a few temporary appointments before being elected to a Fellowship at Trinity College Cambridge in 1955. Finally, of course, he was very much present at the creation of a new world order, but unfortunately one which bore little resemblance to that which he had looked forward to for so long. Indeed, as the Cold War intensified, Carr found that his particular style of radical theorizing, combined with what many saw as his pro-Soviet outlook, made him something of a political outsider in the new Britain of the late 1940s and early 1950s. Vilified by his conservative enemies on the right, and attacked quite openly by economic liberals like Hayek (who referred to him as one of the ‘totalitarians in our midst’)<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn74" id="intro_fn74">74</a> and academic insiders like Isaiah Berlin (who shared his fascination with nineteenth-century Russia but hated his politics),<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn75" id="intro_fn75">75</a> Carr effectively became a prophet outcast in his own country.</p>
<p class="para">However, while all this was happening at home, within the newly established bastion of free world anti-communism, his study on international relations started to exert some considerable influence. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> had already acquired a fairly wide readership in the United States before the end of the Second World War and its reissue in 1946 then made it more widely available. Carr had further contributed to his reputation (and notoriety) through the publication of <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace and Nationalism and After</span>, both of which appeared in American editions. Some insiders were also aware of his many editorials written for the <span class="italic">London Times</span>, and while a few might have appreciated the writing of this quasi-anonymous dissident at the heart of the English establishment, others took a less charitable view of the steady stream of pieces flowing from Carr’s pen attacking the fundamentals of the free enterprise system. A number of Americans were equally sensitive to the fact that Carr’s radical views were none too popular amongst certain British politicians either. Indeed, at dinner one evening, the Duke of Devonshire was even reported to have attacked what he and many others viewed as the left-wing drift in <span class="italic">The Times</span>, and while nobody named Carr, many believed that it was this ‘Red Professor from Printing House Square’ who was behind the whole thing. This certainly seemed to be the view across the Atlantic where Carr amongst others was seen (by the <span class="italic">New York Times</span> no less) as having transformed this once solid bastion of the British ruling class into what one critic called the ‘the final edition of the <span class="italic">Daily Worker’</span> – then the daily newspaper of the British Communist Party.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn76" id="intro_fn76">76</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr was not an unknown in the United States therefore. Nor was he unfamiliar with the country itself. He had visited America in the first three months of 1938 (he had even had tea at the White House with Mrs Roosevelt) and thereafter kept a close watch on developments there as the war unfolded and it became increasingly clear that Britain’s leading role in world affairs was gradually giving way to a new <span class="italic">Pax Americana</span>. Carr viewed such a trend with a sense of regret and concern, and warned policy-makers of the dangers of drawing too close to the United States – partly because this would reduce Britain’s room for manoeuvre in the post-war world, but largely because this would alienate the USSR and lead to a new confrontation which he very much wanted to avoid. Not surprisingly, the almost irresistible train of events that led to the Cold War disturbed him greatly. Carr did not blame the West entirely for this drift. However, there was little question in his mind that the main responsibility for the breakdown in relations was America’s refusal after the war – like Britain’s before it – to accommodate the rising power of a potential rival.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn77" id="intro_fn77">77</a></p>
<p class="para">It was within the context of a conflict that Carr fundamentally opposed, in a country which he largely blamed for having initiated it, that <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> had its greatest success in the immediate post-war years. In many ways Carr was a most fortunate author. His volume was one of only a handful on the market, and although written by a non-American had the advantage of being published by someone from a country that still had more than its fair share of admirers in the United States. It also happened along at a particularly important and favourable juncture when international relations as an academic discipline was beginning to take off as a taught subject in American universities. Naturally, there were other books available, and many more would follow as the subject blossomed in the 1950s.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn78" id="intro_fn78">78</a> However, for the moment, in the land of the rising superpower where numerous courses on ‘IR’ were beginning to proliferate alongside those of other expanding disciplines such as Sovietology (’know the enemy’), Strategic Studies (’know how to deter the enemy’) and Area Studies (’know where the enemy will strike next’), <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> proved to be particularly popular. As one American reviewer had predicted, it was always likely to do well and ‘would make an admirable introductory text for any college course in diplomatic history or international relations’, especially as it provided both an excellent analysis of the causes of war and an even ‘more fruitful’ discussion of the problems facing the peace-makers.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn79" id="intro_fn79">79</a></p>
<p class="para">The first to discover this, much to his own surprise one suspects, was Carr himself when he returned to America to teach and research in 1948. After having delivered many lectures in ‘various universities’ across the United States, he found out – much to his chagrin – that while <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was in great demand, his British-based publishers were failing to meet this with a steady supply of books. This not only made little sense from a commercial point of view, it was also very annoying, especially as Carr had discovered at first hand that ‘the book was being fairly widely used as a textbook in international relations’. What he had also found out was that ‘the subject’ was ‘increasing’ in the US by what he called ‘leaps and bounds’. It was a matter of some urgency therefore that Macmillan ship out more copies without any further delay.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn80" id="intro_fn80">80</a> Two months on and Carr was still urging his publisher to remain ever-vigilant. It was critically important, he felt, to keep the ‘American market well fed’. The volume had proven to be a success, ‘largely’ in the ‘universities’. But it was vital to keep stocks up. Sales had already been adversely affected by a failure on the part of Macmillan to ‘guarantee copies’ in enough numbers in the past, and it was essential not to let this happen again in the future. As he pointed out, American ‘professors and tutors had a habit in this country’ (he noted with some incredulity) of ‘asking publishers in advance whether copies of a book’ were available before they would ‘put it on “reading lists for students”’. And many, he had heard, had not done so because they could not get hold of it. Carr was most insistent, admitting that while he would not be quite so optimistic about sales of some of his other work in the United States, he was ‘sure’ that given conditions in America there would be a ‘lasting demand’ for <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn81" id="intro_fn81">81</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr’s optimism about the potential market for <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in the United States was not misplaced. Its analysis of past failures and rather bleak assessment of what motivated men and nations, seemed to match the American mood as it entered into the dark tunnel that was the Cold War. Naturally enough, not everyone appreciated his materialist epistemology or his debt to Marxism.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn82" id="intro_fn82">82</a> But what one did not appreciate one could simply ignore. The book, after all, told a riveting story about the illusions of liberalism and the collapse of an international system, and many read it as a warning to a new generation not to repeat the same mistakes again. This was one of the reasons presumably why Carr’s work held a particular fascination for one man in particular: the German émigré, Hans J. Morgenthau. Though he was less radical than Carr as a function of his economics, and more inclined to think of the drive for power in terms of human nature rather than the uneven distribution of resources, there was clearly much that the two men had in common.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn83" id="intro_fn83">83</a> Both saw the twentieth century as a tragedy.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn84" id="intro_fn84">84</a> The two together had deep concerns about the relevance of liberalism as a doctrine for the twentieth century. And they had a similar understanding of history and the history of political thought.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn85" id="intro_fn85">85</a> In their very different ways, they were also highly critical of policy-makers in the West, and while Carr was perhaps the more dissident of the two, Morgenthau always retained a deep suspicion of those who wielded what he wrote about most – namely political power.</p>
<p class="para">It was not insignificant therefore that Morgenthau decided to write an extended review of Carr’s work in the first issue of the journal <span class="italic">World Politics</span> in 1948. In an essay that was as incisive as it was sparkling, he combined both high praise and serious criticism in equal measure. Morgenthau was in little doubt. Carr, he argued, had written four books since 1939 (<span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis, Conditions of Peace, Nationalism and After</span> and <span class="italic">The Soviet Impact on the Western World</span>) that taken together represented a contribution of the ‘first order’ which ‘lucidly and brilliantly’ exposed the faults of ‘contemporary political thought in the Western world’. They were so good in fact that they almost rivalled in depth one of Morgenthau’s (and Carr’s) intellectual heroes: Reinhold Niebuhr. However, there was a fundamental flaw and there was no point denying it. The basic problem was less historic than ‘philosophic’. Carr, he suggested, had done a wonderful job explaining the crisis; where he had failed was in finding a moral solution to it. Here Morgenthau effectively restated what others had already said before – that Carr’s relativism made it impossible for him to develop a ‘transcendent point of view from which to survey the political scene and to appraise the phenomenon of power’. The result was to transform Carr the critic and ‘political moralist’ into Carr the ‘utopian of power’ whose only means of knowing what was right or wrong was by the criteria of power itself. Hence, whoever held seeming superiority of power became of necessity the repository of a superior morality as well. It was one thing quoting Machiavelli; however for an observer standing outside the world of power, it was still a dangerous thing to be a Machiavelli. It was even worse to be a Machiavelli ‘without <span class="italic">virtu</span>’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn86" id="intro_fn86">86</a></p>
<p class="para">Though critical, Morgenthau’s review obviously did Carr’s reputation a great deal of good in the United States, where sales of the book continued to be steady. However, there was a limit to how well a complex study originally entitled <span class="italic">Utopia and Reality</span>, written by a radically-inclined Englishman with a distinct bias against the capitalist system, was ever going to do in the United States. Moreover, as the subject continued to expand so too did demand for more accessible textbooks, and whatever else might be said about <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> it was most definitely not that. It may well have been called an ‘introduction to the study of international relations’, but it could not have read like one to the average American graduate looking for a basic route map through contemporary world problems. This is why Morgenthau’s own volume, <span class="italic">Politics Among Nations</span>, first published in 1948, was to do so well. Brought out by a commercial publisher and written very specifically for the student market, it established itself as the book on international relations in ways that <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> could never have done. With its simple structure and lists of these principles of realism, those definitions of foreign policy, and its four reasons why disarmament could not work, it was the perfect vehicle for those looking for a quick and easy entry into the subject. By contrast, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was not only structurally difficult and intellectually more demanding, but did not even begin to address the sorts of issues such as deterrence and American grand strategy, that were fast becoming part of the staple fare in most American courses on international relations.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn87" id="intro_fn87">87</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr also suffered as the discipline itself began to evolve in the United States from what it had been in the initial stages – a subject as much influenced by history and political philosophy as by political science – to what it gradually became in the 1960s and 1970s: quantitative, behavioural, and narrowly scientific in scope. In this brave new measured world of game theory, where one’s level of analysis appeared to count as much if not more than one’s understanding of the past, Carr’s volume, with its extraordinary range of references drawn from a host of writers who were either unknown or taboo in the United States, must have made <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> look not only outdated and wordy (and possibly subversive too) but beside the point. No doubt historians of the discipline still found him interesting, as did political theorists.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn88" id="intro_fn88">88</a> But as the focus of the subject altered and the issues it addressed changed, then <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> began to look more and more like an historical hangover from a bygone age. Not that Carr disappeared from sight completely. In 1964 his book came out in a popular softback American edition, which did quite well. In 1967 he was then made the subject of a major review, though unfortunately not a particularly good or positive one.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn89" id="intro_fn89">89</a> And a few years later he resurfaced once again through the work of Robert Gilpin, whose interest in the concept of hegemony and hegemonic stability led him to engage in a fairly serious way with Carr’s analysis of the inter-war system.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn90" id="intro_fn90">90</a> For some at least <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> still retained some fascination, even in an age of high positivism when neither his questions nor his answers seemed as pertinent as they once had to an earlier generation growing up in the shadow of the Second World War and the early days of the Cold War.</p>
<p class="para">Carr’s growing marginalization from mainstream international relations in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s, should not, though, obscure his very real impact.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn91" id="intro_fn91">91</a> As yet another American admirer put it, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was in effect the ‘the first "scientific" treatment of modern world politics’ and was regarded as such by very many of those who entered the discipline by one route or another in the years immediately following the war.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn92" id="intro_fn92">92</a> Carr also exerted an influence in another, possibly less positive way: by furnishing students with a particular story about how international relations had evolved and matured into a serious and scientifically respectable academic discipline. The story was simple and optimistic, and like all the best stories it had a happy ending. According to those who told it, this wily Englishman engaged in mortal intellectual combat with a range of woolly-minded thinkers who did not understand the real world, and after several skirmishes met and defeated them in a battle that came to be known as the ‘first great debate’. Naturally enough he won the encounter, and consequently helped establish international relations as a proper subject, cleansed of the ‘utopian’ nonsense that had presumably held it back in the early years. This epic tale of Carr the impaler, confronting and finally defeating the beast of idealism, was repeated so often that few questioned what to later writers looked like a gross simplification. The fact that the beast was never killed, and that the impaler might have set up a series of straw men in the process, was largely ignored. So too was the rather obvious fact that there might have been other writers around who also contributed to the birth of the subject in the modern era.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn93" id="intro_fn93">93</a> But again, this was politely passed over in silence by those who perhaps needed such simplifying ‘foundational myths’ to help them on their way.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn94" id="intro_fn94">94</a> In this fashion, though unbeknown to Carr, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was transformed into an historic morality tale with its wise sages and na tve fools, with the former in the end vanquishing the latter and in the process purging the discipline of its early optimistic excesses.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn95" id="intro_fn95">95</a></p>
<p class="para">The other way in which Carr shaped the course of international relations in the United States was more theoretical than mythical, and this was by helping legitimize a particular theoretical approach that went under the generic name of ‘realism’. The precise extent to which he did so given the obvious differences between himself and Morgenthau, not to mention later versions of realism which possessed neither his critical understanding of the world nor his sensitivity to historical change, has led several writers to doubt there was ever a relationship at all.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn96" id="intro_fn96">96</a> However, there was a connection of sorts.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn97" id="intro_fn97">97</a> Carr may well have been a very different sort of realist, but <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> still addressed the fundamental problem of how inequality among states led to conflict between them, which remained of central concern to more mainstream writers.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn98" id="intro_fn98">98</a> This might not have made Carr ‘the realist’s realist’,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn99" id="intro_fn99">99</a> any more than his particular brand of realism prevented him from both justifying the appeasement of Hitler while attacking the foundations of bourgeois society at the same time.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn100" id="intro_fn100">100</a> As has been observed, there are many different types of realist and various forms of realism.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn101" id="intro_fn101">101</a> But that has always been the ‘trouble’ with a theory that in one set of hands can justify the use of power, and in others (like Carr’s) can be turned into a critical weapon to attack those who would defend the status quo.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn102" id="intro_fn102">102</a></p>
<p class="header1" id="int-head5">Carr, Merrie England and the ‘English School’</p>
<p class="NoIndent">One of the many ironies about the history of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> is that while its meaning was being vigorously debated in the United States, in the land of Carr’s birth it was revered but rarely discussed at all. Even in his <span class="italic">almer mata</span> back in Wales it was hardly a cause for fevered discussion. Indeed, according to one who joined the department in 1961 he had ‘no recollection of Carr ever being mentioned in lectures or seminars’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn103" id="intro_fn103">103</a> Certainly, the more general relationship between the man on the one hand, and what passed for the subject of international relations in Britain in the 1950s and 1960s on the other, could hardly be described as intimate. He reviewed the odd book,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn104" id="intro_fn104">104</a> and once even read a manuscript by C. A. W. Manning in 1961, though only to warn the publishers that if they were to publish it they had better be prepared for some ‘perfunctory and hostile reviews’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn105" id="intro_fn105">105</a> He also attended a conference commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of his old department back in Aberstwyth,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn106" id="intro_fn106">106</a> and on one occasion was persuaded by NATO to give a lecture on the world scene, which he appropriately entitled ‘<span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn107" id="intro_fn107">107</a> But that was about the sum of it. Carr had very little interest in the subject as such, while some of those who purported to represent the subject had, it seems, little desire to engage in a positive way with him.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn108" id="intro_fn108">108</a> In fact, when a number of leading lights, including the Cambridge historian, Herbert Butterfield, decided to form what became known as the ‘British Committee on the Theory of International Relations’ in the late 1950s, they did not even invite him. As one of the initial founders of the group, Martin Wight made clear: ‘I hesitate about E. H. Carr’ not on personal grounds, but ‘because he is so much of a Great Power in this region that I should have misgivings lest he might deflect our discussions into channels opened up by his own work’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn109" id="intro_fn109">109</a> There would have been little point inviting him anyway. The central intellectual concept around which the Committee was originally formed – the idea of an ‘international society’ of states bound by common rules and institutions for the conduct of their relations – was one that was hardly likely to recommend itself to someone as ‘Hobbesian’ as Carr.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn110" id="intro_fn110">110</a></p>
<p class="para">The history of the Committee and its relationship with Carr was by any measure a strange one. Its members obviously knew about his work in general and <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in particular. Martin Wight had even written a penetrating and critical review of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in 1946 in which he not only chastised Carr’s ‘provocative’ but ‘unsatisfying’ study, but also claimed that one of his early critics, Leonard Woolf, had penned a ‘deadly reply’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn111" id="intro_fn111">111</a> The conservative Wight thereafter never appeared to be anything but hostile, and though he felt obliged to come to terms with what even he recognized was a ‘brilliant’ study, was very much opposed to Carr, and, according to one account at least, ‘treated’ him ‘with disdain’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn112" id="intro_fn112">112</a> He was certainly critical of his views and at different times attacked his defence of appeasement, what he saw as his Marxist-influenced theory of ideology,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn113" id="intro_fn113">113</a> and the fact that he regarded ‘power’ as being ‘anterior to society, law, justice and morality’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn114" id="intro_fn114">114</a> Nor was one of the other members of the Committee, Butterfield, especially enamoured of his Cambridge colleague either, and for good reason. Carr had after all attacked him in no uncertain terms in 1951 as one of the many historians who propounded what to his eyes at least seemed to be a reactionary theory that denied the possibility of progress.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn115" id="intro_fn115">115</a> He had then criticized him again a decade later, and, more robustly still, for having written a ‘remarkable book’ (<span class="italic">The Whig Interpretation of History</span>) that was remarkable amongst other things for not having named ‘a single Whig except Fox, who was no historian, or a single historian save Acton, who was no Whig’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn116" id="intro_fn116">116</a> Butterfield in turn had little time for Carr whose defence of the Russian revolution left the Christian Butterfield very cold indeed.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn117" id="intro_fn117">117</a> Butterfield was even moved to attack Carr’s views expressed in his best-seller <span class="italic">What is History</span>? published in 1961. While conceding that the book was ‘most interesting’ he still thought that there was ‘a distinct tendency’ within Carr’s approach which ‘operates to undermine the status of history as an autonomous science’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn118" id="intro_fn118">118</a> Interestingly, it was through his prompting that Carr in the end was refused an invitation to join the Committee.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn119" id="intro_fn119">119</a></p>
<p class="para">The renewed interest in Carr, if it can be called that, did not stem from any work done on him by the Committee or by any attempt by this distinctly exclusive group to come to terms collectively with <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn120" id="intro_fn120">120</a> Rather it manifested itself in one of the more serious individual efforts by one of its members, Hedley Bull, to assess its contribution and relevance thirty years after its original publication. An Australian by birth who came to Britain before returning home in the second half of the 1960s, Bull had been taught by both Wight and Manning at the LSE, though his main inspiration initially was Philip Noel-Baker, even though Bull strongly opposed Noel-Baker’s support for disarmament. In the 1960s he then turned his attention to the issue of how international order could be maintained under conditions of sovereignty and anarchy, and arrived at the conclusion, via a reading of the seventeenth-century legal theorist Grotius, that states did not inhabit a Hobbesian universe but rather constituted a society of their own bound together by law. At first sight, therefore, there was little to suggest that Bull and Carr had a great deal in common. But Bull did have an interest in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> and felt obliged to deal with it seriously. Originally entitled ‘E. H. Carr and the Fifty Years’ Crisis’, his critique was finally published as ‘<span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> Thirty Years On’. In many respects, the paper not only represented ‘an important stage in the evolution’ of his own thinking,<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn121" id="intro_fn121">121</a> but also constituted something of a manifesto for those who felt that Carr represented more of an obstacle to the development of a mature international relations than an inspiration.</p>
<p class="para">Bull did not reject <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in its entirety. Indeed, there were certain things with which he strongly agreed, including its realist rejection of liberal internationalism and suggestive observations on the problem of peaceful change. Bull even went so far as to suggest that Carr’s more general ‘analysis of what international politics’ was like was ‘correct’. However, there were many more things with which he happened to disagree. Most obviously he rejected the book’s ‘relativism’ and by way of example approvingly cited Morgenthau’s earlier observation that Carr, lacking any objective perspective of his own from which to make an ethical judgment about the world, was always compelled to ‘surrender’ to what the American writer had called ‘the immanence of power’. It was no accident of course that Carr had been in favour of appeasement, for it flowed logically from what Bull defined as his ‘relativist and instrumentalist conception of morals’ in which it was impossible to distinguish between good and evil, right and wrong. Bull’s other more substantial objection was historical. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, he believed, was in essence a ‘tract for 1939, not for 1969’. It was important therefore to develop a theory of international relations that reflected new realities. According to Bull, when Carr had written his volume the world was a very different place. Europe stood at its heart, Wilsonianism remained a genuine force in international politics, realism had yet to assert itself, and the main line of division internationally was that deriving from the legacy of 1919. Thirty years on and the situation had altered dramatically. European domination was a thing of the past, the lessons of realism had been assimilated, the main divisions in the world were no longer between the defenders and the critics of the Versailles system, and the greatest challenge now was not how to deal with ‘have-not’ powers like Germany but the new revisionist states in the Third World like communist China. In short, new times posed different questions that were bound to lead to different types of answers.</p>
<p class="para">It was at this point that Bull laid his own particular theoretical cards on the table. Carr, he agreed, had done a fine job demolishing old nineteenth-century illusions about the world, and an even more important one showing how foundational notions developed in one era and unfortunately retained in another – had been one of the main causes of the twenty years’ crisis. However, ‘having completed this work of demolition’ Carr had not then gone on to consider what ‘institutions and devices’ would be necessary to sustain and maintain ‘order’ among states under ‘present circumstances’. This then allowed Bull to introduce his own master concept that of ‘international society’, a notion that Carr ‘scarcely recognized’ in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Indeed, according to Bull, in the ‘course of demonstrating how appeals to an overriding international society subserve the special interests of the ruling groups of powers’ Carr had jettisoned ‘the idea of international society itself’. This was his major weakness as a theorist then and why his views had to be repudiated now: not because he was wrong in terms of his understanding of history or even in rejecting the claims of the idealists so-called; but rather because his whole outlook denied the possibility of there ever having been (or there being) an order based upon common interests, common values and by implication comnion rules and institutions that taken together formed the basis of ‘an international society’. This was critical: critical in terms of Carr but critical too in terms of the future of international relations because it was this ‘idea’ which Carr had rejected so strongly in 1939 that would, he hoped, form the foundation stone for a ‘new analysis of the problem of international relations’. What Carr had started but failed to complete we should ‘now begin’.</p>
<p class="para">The extent to which Bull presented an entirely accurate picture of Carr’s international relations must be open to some doubt.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn122" id="intro_fn122">122</a> However, the importance of the piece did not lay in its literal accuracy, but in what it said about Carr’s theoretical denial of something which Bull saw as fundamental. On this issue at least Bull could hardly be faulted. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> had grappled with the question of how states related to each other, but it had arrived at rather different conclusions to those which Bull regarded as being central to the renewal of international relations. Carr agreed. As he admitted a few years after <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> had been published, he too had once wondered whether there had been (or could ever be) what he called a ‘community of nations’, but had arrived at the conclusion that under conditions of inequality it was simply out of the question.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn123" id="intro_fn123">123</a> He was also familiar with the work of Charles Manning whose ideas had had a big impact on people like Bull, and he did not think much of them. In fact at about the same time that the British Committee was setting out on its own particular journey, he was privately deriding Manning’s theoretical claims about the ‘nature of international society’ as being likely to ‘encourage illusions’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn124" id="intro_fn124">124</a> Nor did he change his mind much thereafter, and several years later confessed to an American academic that he and others had tried many years ago ‘to conjure into existence an international society’. However, the whole project had come to nothing for the simple reason that there was no such thing as ‘an international society’ but instead ‘an open club without substantive rules’ a view diametrically opposed to that of Bull’s.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn125" id="intro_fn125">125</a></p>
<p class="para">Bull’s critique of Carr’s theory and Carr’s rejection of the core notion that formed the basis of what subsequently became known as the English School, appeared to leave little room for doubt. The two had little in common and there was little point in trying to reconcile what in the end could not be reconciled.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn126" id="intro_fn126">126</a> Of course, those who constituted the school so-called could hardly ignore <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. It was, after all, one of the most famous studies on international relations written by a non-American, and anybody entering the discipline in Britain had to come to terms with it. In the end, however, the distance separating Carr the Englishman and this very specific ‘English’ contribution to the discourse of international relations, was an extraordinarily wide one.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn127" id="intro_fn127">127</a> On one side stood those who stressed the centrality of shared norms and that which Carr had long ago rejected – the idea that there was an entity known as a society of states; and on the other was Carr himself, who, in spite of a certain tough-minded historical realism that people like Bull and Wight appreciated, conceived of international politics in a very different way. That he stimulated critics like Wight and Bull goes without saying. Indeed, in a crucial way, it is difficult to understand what they had to say without first having read Carr. But is difficult to think of Carr actually anticipating their work.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn128" id="intro_fn128">128</a> He may have forced others of a very different persuasion to take him seriously. But, as both Bull and Wight seemed to imply, he represented a hurdle that had to be overcome rather than a resource to be used.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn129" id="intro_fn129">129</a></p>
<p class="header1" id="int-head6">Carr goes critical</p>
<p class="NoIndent">If Carr’s connection to the English School remained decidedly tenuous, one wonders what he would have made of the new interest taken in his work by a group of writers in the 1980s and 1990s. Critical of those who would subsume him under the banner heading of ‘realist’, but equally chary of being labelled Marxist themselves, this diverse band came to see in Carr a much underutilized resource that was going begging in the last decade of the Cold War. Motivated by either a more general discontent with the conservative character of international relations as a discipline, or a desire to take security studies and political economy in a more radical direction, supporters of what became known as ‘critical theory’ came to see in Carr someone who could be deployed in a more creative fashion than he had been in the past. Inspired in some cases by the work of the early German theorist Max Horkheimer who, like Carr, saw a close relationship between the production of ideas and the world of power, and in others by the non-economistic Marxism of the Italian Communist Antonio Gramsci who popularized the key notion of hegemony, the new critical theorists were to go on to make a distinct contribution to the study of international relations, and one of the ways in which they did so was through a re-engagement with Carr’s work.</p>
<p class="para">Perhaps the first move in the reclamation of Carr was taken by the Canadian political economist, Robert Cox. An expert on labour economics who had spent many years of his life working in the International Labour Organization in Geneva, Cox was an eclectic but creative thinker who with the less radical (but equally iconoclastic) Susan Strange had helped build a base within international relations for a more critically inclined political economy. Gramscian rather than Marxist in theoretical orientation, Cox had always been a great admirer of Carr. Significantly though it was not just <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> that informed his view of Carr (though it played a role) but Carr’s work more generally, including his various biographical studies of Bakunin and Herzen, Marx and Dostoevsky, his later work on the Russian revolution, as well as his thoughts on the nature of history. Indeed, what seemed to impress Cox most was Carr’s stubborn refusal to be bound by the sort of constrictions that later imposed themselves on academics trained in this or that particular narrow specialization. As Cox observed, Carr not only happened to be well informed but could combine many different levels of analysis, and so paint a picture of a particular period that was not merely more interesting than the average, but historically more sensitive as well. As Cox put it in a short, but deeply revealing autobiographical reflection,</p>
<p class="extract">Carr brought an historical mode of thought to whatever he wrote. He was equally alive to economic, social, cultural, and ideological matters. He studied individuals, especially those whose intellectual influence marked an era; but most of all, he brought all these elements to an understanding of structural change.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn130" id="intro_fn130">130</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Cox’s admiration for Carr was thus enormous. He certainly referred to him in his masterwork published in the second half of the 1980s.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn131" id="intro_fn131">131</a> But it was his hugely influential article of 1981 that probably did more than anything else to raise Carr’s profile amongst a new generation of students looking for alternative ways of theorizing international relations. Yet the importance of the piece lay not so much in what Cox said about Carr and history, but in his insistence in drawing a clear line of demarcation between orthodox realism or neo-realism – against which the article was largely directed – and Carr’s own very distinctive approach to the study of world politics. Others had hinted at this in the past, and a few of his more sensitive interpreters had already made the point that Carr’s form of realism bore little resemblance to that propagated by more mainstream international relations in the United States.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn132" id="intro_fn132">132</a> However, it was Cox, probably more than any other writer, who dug the deepest channel between the two, and ‘rescued’ Carr from what he saw as the iron grip that had been imposed upon him by others in the past. Not that Carr had nothing in common with other realists. On the contrary. However, it was his particular brand of realism that inspired Cox. For instead of accepting power as it was, Carr in his view managed to look behind the ideological masks which power wore and reveal its hidden mainsprings. Cox also liked the way in which Carr looked at the world not as a discrete set of realities but as a totality. This was critically important, for it meant that unlike more orthodox realists who made a sharp distinction between the unit of the state and the international system itself, Carr viewed ‘reality’ wholistically, never thinking for one moment that how states acted or what they did could be discussed separately from the larger international system. Nor did he accept that the relations between states were doomed to repeat themselves. Indeed, as Cox pointed out, the whole thrust of Carr’s discussion was to show how changes within states over time had led slowly and irrevocably to the breakdown of the conditions which had made the nineteenth century possible and the twentieth century so unstable. This again was crucial. In fact, it was only by employing a similar methodology (one which Carr, by the way, had developed quite independently of anything he may have said directly about either international relations or the state) that one would be able to illuminate the evolution of the modern state and global relationships in a very rapidly transforming world where production within nations was giving way to the internationalization of production, where the state as constituted since the Treaty of Westphalia was fast being internationalized itself, and where the forms of hegemony that had formed the basis of world order in the post-war period – a question that Carr had addressed briefly in his own study on the inter-war system – were fast dissolving and opening up new historical possibilities.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn133" id="intro_fn133">133</a></p>
<p class="para">In his own work Cox himself distinguished between two ways of thinking – one he termed ‘problem solving’ and the other ‘critical’. The former, which was distinctly not Carr, effectively accepted reality as it was and then attempted to solve any problems facing the world within a specific and set framework defined by those who controlled the reins of power. The latter stood apart from the prevailing order and asked how that order had come about, how it had changed over time, and ultimately how it might be transcended. Cox also insisted (and here he almost paraphrased Carr exactly) that all forms of theory must always be for someone or some purpose, and that unless it proposed a way forward it was little more than useless. Here again Carr served as a model thinker who not only discussed the causes of things – in this case the collapse of the inter-war system – but also tried to propose solutions. He did this initially and tentatively in the last few pages of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, and then in more detail in <span class="italic">Conditions of the Peace, Nationalism and After, The Soviet Impact on the Western World</span> and his important study, aptly and significantly called <span class="italic">The New Society</span>. This forward-looking or even utopian aspect of Carr’s work (largely ignored by international relations scholars in the United States and Britain during the height of the Cold War) was one that interested a number of writers other than Cox. One was the political theorist, Andrew Linklater. However, whereas Cox used Carr to inform his work on international political economy and large-scale historical change, Linklater deployed him to think creatively about the possibility of constructing a new theory of political community based upon different notions of citizenship.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn134" id="intro_fn134">134</a></p>
<p class="para">Like many in the international relations community, Linklater had for many years regarded Carr’s work as being that of an ‘unadulterated realist’. But in the process of rethinking his own ideas that would in the end take him ‘beyond realism and Marxism’ towards a more serious engagement with the idea of ‘the transformation of political community’, he was forced to come to terms once again with Carr’s contribution.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn135" id="intro_fn135">135</a> He did so first in 1990 in a study that rather tentatively suggested that in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> Carr had tried to resolve the basic ‘antinomy between realism and idealism’ by setting forth a ‘defence of national policy which aimed at the extension of moral obligation and the enlargement of political community’. But the idea was never fully developed and it was to take some time before Linklater would exploit Carr to the full. Interestingly this occurred not through any new reading of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, but through a discovery of Carr’s later work on nationalism and the nation-state. Indeed, it was to be Linklater’s meeting with this ‘other’ Carr, and in particular what he later referred to as his ‘magisterial essay’ <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span> published in 1945, that seemed to inspire him far more than Carr’s earlier classic. Linklater’s praise for Carr’s 1945 study seemed to know no bounds. It was in his view ‘an exemplary attempt, unequalled in the field, to show how the achievements of modern political life can be secured while the propensity for violence and exclusion is overcome’; and Carr did so, basically, by both reconfiguring the relationship between the nation-state and the international system on the one hand, and the concept of citizenship and what citizenship meant in a new Europe on the other. The result was one of the more exciting and radical attempts in modern political theory to think through the lessons of the past in order to be able to build a more enlightened future that ‘would be more internationalist’ than its ‘predecessors, more sensitive to cultural differences, and more passionately committed to ending social and economic inequalities’.</p>
<p class="para">What Linklater referred to as his ‘morally charged’ reading of Carr was not unconnected, of course, to a larger political and intellectual agenda in which he had by now become a key figure. Radical in outlook but open to many influences, the central concern of the new wave was to develop new perspectives in international relations that would challenge inequality and exclusion and in this way advance a form of emancipatory politics that was not just ‘problem solving’ (to use Cox’s terminology) but critical all the way down. Carr, he believed, contributed to this project in at least two important ways: through an embryonic but increasingly sophisticated normative analysis of how the nation-state ought to evolve; and by engaging in a serious (though largely unfinished) discussion of how the study of international relations might be reformed in order to tackle the dominant moral and political questions of the epoch. According to Linklater, this did not make Carr a utopian. As he noted, his proposals for a new politics was not spun out of thin air but was rather immanent in his analysis. On the other hand, it did not suffer from the ‘sterility’ normally associated with realism. And it was vitally important to reclaim this aspect of his thought, which had hitherto been obscured by his reputation as a realist. Only when this had been done would it be possible to develop a mature international relations which transcended the immediate without descending into fantasy.</p>
<p class="para">Linklater’s long march back to Carr was paralleled, at least in part, by the journey travelled by an equally influential writer, Ken Booth. A strategist who had made his reputation in the 1970s, Booth gradually came to question most if not all of the central claims made by realism in the 1970s and 1980s. There was no ‘Road to Damascus’ conversion, but instead a series of engagements which over time led him to question that which he had once assumed to be true. The first realist truth to go was probably the notion that all states behaved similarly within a given set of determined structures; the next was the idea of the ‘Soviet threat’ and the logic or illogic of nuclear deterrence; and the last is what he later called the ‘Cold Wars of the mind’ which supported such policies. In the process, Booth carved out a quite unique position within and outside the international relations community, one that preceded the Second Cold War with the publication of his <span class="italic">Strategy and Ethnocentrism</span> in 1979, but was then consolidated in the turbulent days which followed in the ongoing debates about the role of nuclear weapons in a divided Europe. An early advocate of the notion of non-offensive defence, and a major enthusiast of Gorbachev’s new thinking about foreign policy and European security, Booth not only challenged conventional thinking about security policy but in the process effectively helped to popularize a set of fairly complex ideas that went under the general heading of ‘critical security studies’. Premised on the assumption that realism in its more developed form was inadequate, but that any prospect for change had to begin from where we were (rather than where we were not), ‘CSS’ as it became known ploughed a path somewhere between more radical critics on the far left who dreamed dreams that could never be realized, and the tired complacency that had for so long characterized thinking about security in the West.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn136" id="intro_fn136">136</a></p>
<p class="para">It was thus of no little significance that Booth decided to make Carr the subject of his inaugural lecture in 1991. Nor was it accidental. Booth, after all, had come to reject the realist norms in which he had originally been trained, and in Carr he saw a writer who had also grappled in the past with the questions posed by realism and found their answers to be wanting too. He was equally interested, however, in Carr the ‘utopian’ who though labelled ‘realist’ had (like himself) pursued what he called the same goal of trying to reconcile the pursuit of a different world – termed ‘utopia’ – but had sought to embed this within a given set of facts called ‘reality’. Booth called this approach ‘utopian realism’, which, though not without its problems, appealed precisely because it tried to bring together the two ‘planes’ of utopia and reality which Carr had said could never meet.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn137" id="intro_fn137">137</a> Others had pursued the same goals of trying to reconcile the two, but it was possibly Carr more than anybody else who had grappled most consistently with the ever-present issue of seeking to develop a theory of the world based upon the world as an empirical reality but never accepting the world as it was. Not that Carr was without his problems. According to Booth, Carr was rather confused as to where he stood in relation to utopianism and realism. His attacks on the utopians so-called had also done a great deal of damage to the reputation of Kant. However, the important task was not to dwell on the limits of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, but instead to rescue its many insights from the realists pure and simple. His more orthodox readers in the past had only seemed to notice where Carr the realist was attacking the utopians. It was equally vital, if not more so, to note his uncertainty towards realism as well as where he made the most positive comments about utopianism itself.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn138" id="intro_fn138">138</a></p>
<p class="para">The attempt by a number of leading writers to retrieve Carr from realism and exploit his critical potential represented a significant move in international relations. Nonetheless, it was not without its problems. First, there was the not insignificant issue of Carr’s economics. Carr lived in an era during which the most readily available answer to the failure of the old economic system was some form of planning that would transcend the limits of the market and make a more effective use of resources in a more equitable way. The events of 1989, followed two years later by the disintegration of the Soviet Union, seemed to put pay to such ideas, and in the process removed at least one of the props supporting Carr’s larger vision of a new international order. His conception of that order moreover left a few things to be desired. A modernist in every respect who was ever keen to be on the side of what he saw as ‘progress’, he was perhaps a little less sensitive than he might have been about the costs which progress tended to exact from those who stood in the way. Indeed, those who did stand in the path of history got short shrift from Carr (small nations and peasants in particular) while those who appeared to be the bearers of a new age, the big powers, Lenin and even Stalin – that great ‘westernizer’, as he once referred to him – were more often than not treated with kid gloves. Carr, as Isaiah Berlin once observed, always seemed to be with the big battalions, the winners of history, and not its losers.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn139" id="intro_fn139">139</a> Finally, if we are to judge Carr as a critical theorist, we can hardly ignore the fact that he effectively provided a rationalization for the foreign policies of Germany before the war, and Soviet Russia after it. No doubt both these ‘have-not’ states had suffered much at the hands of the more powerful democracies, and Carr was honest enough to say so. Unfortunately, in the process, he ended up by providing a theoretical gloss for what the two powers then did in Eastern Europe. This not only denied certain rights to countries like Czechoslovakia and Poland, but also laid Carr open to the quite legitimate charge of being consistently opposed to the West but not to the West’s enemies. Carr might have been critical, but evidently he was not consistently critical enough. To paraphrase a term later made popular in international relations, he was never quite critical ‘all the way down’.</p>
<p class="header1" id="int-head7">Conclusion</p>
<p class="NoIndent">As this extended essay has tried to show, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was not the only book that Carr wrote on international relations; however, it was the one volume that secured his reputation in the field. In a way this was most fortunate for Carr, for whereas what he regarded as his most important contribution to human knowledge – his history of early Soviet Russia – is now hardly read at all, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, in which he displayed only a limited degree of interest, continues to be read and discussed. Indeed, whereas his reputation as an historian of the USSR waned considerably after the system’s collapse in 1991, his standing in international relations appears to have gone from strength to strength. Moreover, this happened during a decade which was not especially kind to more conventional realists. Carr, on the other hand, was never more popular. In 1998 he was the subject of two major reassessments.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn140" id="intro_fn140">140</a> The following year he got the biography he deserved.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn141" id="intro_fn141">141</a> And in 2000 there was an attempt by scholars from a variety of disciplines to deal in a fair but not uncritical way with his contribution to intellectual life over a half-century period.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn142" id="intro_fn142">142</a> So much got to be written about Carr in fact that one commentator was even moved to talk of a new ‘Carr’ industry in the making.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn143" id="intro_fn143">143</a></p>
<p class="para">This renewed interest in Carr raises a fairly obvious question about the contemporary importance and relevance of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Carr himself always appeared to be in two minds about the book’s long-term prospects. He accepted that it might be of some ‘interest and significance’ to those who read it later. On the other hand, he did not have the confidence of someone like Thucydides the Greek historian, who predicted (correctly as it turned out) that his volume on the Peloponne-sian Wars would last ‘for ever’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn144" id="intro_fn144">144</a> Conceived in a pre-superpower age of well-defined nation-states and national economies, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, according to Carr just a few years after it had been published, had ‘already’ become something of ‘a period piece’. Several decades on, and that harsh judgement passed in 1945, when it was perfectly normal to assume (as did Carr) that western capitalism had a past but no future, and that planning and progress were synonymous terms, would appear to be more true than ever.</p>
<p class="para">Yet serious claims can still be made on behalf of the book – the most obvious perhaps being that it does provide us with an extraordinarily exciting analysis of the inter-war period; and, as Carr no doubt anticipated, it was a period that was likely to cast a very long shadow. Certainly, the lessons later drawn from these turbulent years, especially the so-called lessons of ‘Munich’, played a critical role in shaping the way in which subsequent policy-makers in the West came to look at the world around them, particularly during the chill days of the Cold War, when many assumed that the only way of preventing another war now was by hanging tough with the Russians in ways that the democracies had not hung tough with the Germans before 1939. From this perspective, Carr served two entirely different masters in the post-war period: one that pointed to his advocacy of appeasement and cried ‘never again’, and another that relished his attacks on the idealists and applauded him loud and long for reminding the na tve that in an age of aggressive totalitarian powers, it was always wise to carry a big stick – even if one did not always have to use it.</p>
<p class="para">Another important reason for revisiting <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> is that it is one of those books that can be read on several different levels. Written at a time when one era was about to break down, it can be studied, and more often than not has been, as a particular type of analysis of a very peculiar moment in time. But locked away within its more specific observations about the inter-war system, there was something of a more general character struggling to be heard: namely a theory of international crisis. Eschewing any single-factor structural explanation as to why wars occur or systems break down, Carr in effect identifies three critical factors that have to be present to make any potential crisis dangerous and threatening: the existence of powerful and resentful states situated outside of the international order; a profound and sustained disruption to the operation of the global economy; and finally the unwillingness or inability by any single power or ‘hegemon’ to underwrite international order. Carr may not have intended it, but situated within his explanation of one ‘twenty years’ crisis’ was a larger thesis about global stability and instability, and how and why international systems in general can and do break down, with the most devastating consequences.</p>
<p class="para"><span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> also addresses another major issue of more general concern – that is, how should victorious states set about building and maintaining peace after extended periods of war? The question has been and remains an important one, more so than ever perhaps since the end of the Cold War, when the victors once again were compelled to grapple with what one analyst has called ‘the fundamental problem of international relations’.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn145" id="intro_fn145">145</a> It was certainly a problem with which Carr was familiar. In fact, one of the reasons for originally writing <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was not to reflect endlessly on what had gone wrong in the past, but to ensure that the same mistakes were not made again in the future by those to whom Carr dedicated the book: the ‘makers of the coming peace’. And what the past taught was the following. That a successful peace required not only the formation of a set of international institutions but also the creation of a set of social and economic conditions as well; that there could be no peace in Europe unless Germany could find a secure place within it without having to resort to expansion; and that the nation-state had to be regarded as an obstacle to an orderly peace, rather than the vehicle through which order would be achieved. On all counts Carr turned out to be extraordinarily prescient. Indeed, as any study of the way in which those made the peace in 1945 and then again in 1989 would show, indirectly at least they owed a great deal to Carr, and people like Carr, who, having witnessed the failure of one peace settlement, were determined that the same would never happen again.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn146" id="intro_fn146">146</a></p>
<p class="para"><span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> also has a great deal to say about the power of ideas in general, and the meaning of liberalism in particular.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn147" id="intro_fn147">147</a> For Carr, of course, liberalism constituted an ideology of the nineteenth century that was bound to be superseded in the twentieth. In this he turned out to be the prophet of a false collectivist dawn. Liberalism not only survived under the umbrella of American power in the post-war period, but its central tenets proved to be far more resilient than he could ever have anticipated. In fact, with the unexpected victory of the West over communism in 1989, it actually experienced a surge of self-confidence that led at least one well-known writer to proclaim that there was now no serious alternative.<a class="sup" href="#intro-fn148" id="intro_fn148">148</a> Yet, as Carr would have observed, what constitutes the common sense of one age can very easily become the dangerous illusions of another, and a decade or so after the victory of liberalism its limits have become only too apparent, even to those who once championed its values of unfettered markets and open economies. And as we move from one era of romantic market triumphalism to another where an increasing number of actors are questioning the limits of the free enterprise system, we could do a lot worse than revisit what Carr had to say on the subject in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>.</p>
<p class="para">Finally, Carr’s whole approach to international relations, which understands the present as history and power as a problem that has to be taken seriously, is one that many modern students of the subject could do well to ponder. More recent trends in international relations have led some of its leading practitioners into some fairly arcane corners where discussions about what we know has been replaced by endless debates about whether we can know anything, and where the study of history seems to have been replaced by a series of constructed narratives that take as their point of departure the idea that history as such does not exist. Innovation is no doubt the spice of intellectual life, and all advances in knowledge are likely to be built on the bones of those who have gone before. But an international relations that denies the notion of a past, or takes no interest in power, is hardly likely to come up with any major discoveries. This is why <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> retains its vitality, as both a reminder of what we need to be studying and why, and why an engagement with history and power does not have to lead to a worship of either. If we take nothing more than that from the study of his classic work, then we may have taken a very great deal indeed.</p>
<p class="chapterTitle"> </p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn1" id="intro-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See E. L. Ellis, <span class="italic">The University College of Wales Aberystwyth 1872–1972</span> (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1972), esp. pp. 245–60.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn2" id="intro-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In his Inaugural Lecture delivered in Aberystwyth on 14 October 1936, Carr (who had at one time been Assistant Adviser on League Affairs in the Foreign Office) criticized the idea of using economic sanctions to either punish or deter Japanese aggression in Asia. This infuriated his liberal critics who also happened to be close to Davies. One such was Gilbert Murray, who attacked Carr directly in a personal letter for having in his lecture repudiated ‘the whole League principle’. How, he continued, was the expansion of Germany, Japan or Italy to be resisted if sanctions were abandoned? Carr replied that unless one was prepared to resort to force, then all talk of sanctions was pointless. Cited in Christopher Thorne, <span class="italic">The Limits of Foreign Policy: the West, the League and the Far Eastern Crisis of 1931–1933</span> (London: Macmillan, 1972), p. 382. The Carr Lecture was published under the title of ‘Public Opinion as a Safeguard of Peace’, <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, Vol. XV, No. 6, November-December 1936, pp. 1–17. See also his ‘The Future of the League’, <span class="italic">The Fortnightly</span>, October 1936 (pp. 385–96) where Carr contrasts the League of the Realists which he associated with the Covenant ‘a cautious and comparatively “realistic” document’, and the ‘League of the Idealists’ who hoped to use the League to prevent war by ‘turning sovereign states into good, law-abiding members of the international community’</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn3" id="intro-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The controversy surrounding the Carr appointment in Aberystwyth is explored in Brian Porter, ‘E. H. Carr – the Aberystwyth Years, 1936–1947’, in Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span> (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2000), pp. 36–67.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn4" id="intro-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter from E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 17 March 1936. Carr Papers, theUniversity of Birmingham Special Collection (hereafter CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn5" id="intro-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Carr used the term in an interview with Peter Scott, ‘Revolution without Passion’, <span class="italic">The Times Higher Educational Supplement</span>, 7 July 1978, p. 7.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn6" id="intro-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Michael Bakunin</span> (London: Macmillan, 1937).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn7" id="intro-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">International Relations Since the Peace Treaties</span> (London: Macmillan, 1937); later reissued under the new title <span class="italic">International Relations Between the Two World Wars</span> (London: Macmillan, 1947). The success of the book was in large part due to Carr spotting a special gap in the market. In his 17 March 1936 letter to Harold Macmillan, he believed that there might be ‘a big demand for such a book — not only for WEA [Workers’ Education Association] purposes but for the sixth forms of schools (particularly girls’ schools where they now all study ‘current events’)’. There are no separate figures to indicate just how many ‘girls’ schools’ actually purchased the volume! (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn8" id="intro-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In his 17 March 1936 letter to Harold Macmillan, Carr wrote that ‘the first resultof the appointment [to the Wilson Chair] is that I have been asked whether or not I will write a short text-book on international affairs since 1919 for publication in Welsh by the university press (mainly I gather, for educational purposes). It will only be worth my while to do so if I can also find an English publisher. Would your firm be interested?’. Carr sent in final proofs in January 1937 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn9" id="intro-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Conditions of Peace</span> (London: Macmillan, 1942). <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span> (London: Macmillan, 1945) sold something close to 30,000 copies and was translated into six languages. <span class="italic">The Soviet Impact on the Western World</span> (London: Macmillan, 1946) sold nearly as well and was translated into five languages. Figures from the Macmillan Publisher Archives (hereafter MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn10" id="intro-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See E. H. Carr, ‘Report And Programme Of Wilson Professor’, 6 April 1943, p. 53. The University College of Wales Aberystwyth Archives (hereafter UWA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn11" id="intro-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Britain: Study of Foreign Policy from the Versailles Peace Treaty to the Outbreak of War</span> (London: Longmans, Green &amp; Co., 1939).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn12" id="intro-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Carr signed the contract to write <span class="italic">Utopia and Reality</span> on 25 July 1938. The title <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis (1919–1939): an Introduction to the Study of International Relations</span> was only agreed to on 15 August 1939 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn13" id="intro-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 15 December 1938 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn14" id="intro-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 12 December 1939 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn15" id="intro-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 27 July 1939 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn16" id="intro-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 15 August 1939 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn17" id="intro-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 2 December 1939 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn18" id="intro-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Professor E. H. Carr, ‘Report and Programme of the Wilson Professor’, 6 April. University of Wales, Aberystwyth Archives (UWA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn19" id="intro-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It was planned to translate <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> into Dutch in 1940 but the war made this impossible. It was first translated into Swedish in 1941 and Spanish in 1942 (Sweden and Spain being neutral countries). It then appeared in Japanese (in 1951 and 1994), German (1972), Portuguese (1981 and 2000), Greek (1999) and Korean (2000). Information from Carr’s literary agents, Curtis Brown of London. Total sales of the book in English are difficult to calculate from the files, but my own estimate is somewhere around 50,000. This includes all the reprints of the 1st edition of 1939 (three in 1940 alone), the thirteen printings of the 2nd edition of 1946, and the Papermac version of the book which came out in 1981, 1983 and 1984 (twice). This figure does not include sales since 1984, foreign language sales, or sales from the US edition published by Harper &amp; Row, New York in 1964.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn20" id="intro-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter E. H. Carr to Sheila Fitzpatrick, 4 November 1971 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn21" id="intro-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter E. H. Carr to Stanley Hoffman, 30 September 1977 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn22" id="intro-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See for example, Ieuan John, Moorhead Wright and John Garnett, ‘International Politics at Aberystwyth, 1919–1969’, in Brian Porter (ed.), <span class="italic">The Aberystwyth Papers: International Politics</span> (London: Oxford University Press, 1972), p. 97.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn23" id="intro-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In one diary entry, Carr notes that ‘Simon’ [Sir John Simon] rang up to ask if I had been elected to a chair at Oxford’. 6 February 1936 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn24" id="intro-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Under the <span class="italic">nom de plume</span> of John Hallett, Carr wrote in 1933 that the utopian notion of a classless society was the ‘Achilles’ Heel of Marxism’, and that the idea of one was as ‘dull as the heaven of the orthodox Victorian’. See his ‘Karl Marx: Fifty Years After’, <span class="italic">Fortnightly</span>, March 1933, p. 321.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn25" id="intro-fn25">25.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For Carr’s scepticism about ‘world revolution’ see his later History of Soviet Russia (1950–1978. London, Macmillan, 10 volumes, 1950–78). Carr recognized the influence of the USSR on the West. However, he never thought that revolution in the West was likely or feasible.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn26" id="intro-fn26">26.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">On Carr’s early views, see his ‘Autobiography’ in Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: Critical Appraisal</span>, pp. xiii-xxii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn27" id="intro-fn27">27.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Alan Sharp, ‘Britain and the protection of minorities at the Paris peace conference, 1919’, in A. C. Hepburn (ed.), <span class="italic">Minorities in History</span> (New York: St Martin Press, 1979), pp. 173 and 185 n.12.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn28" id="intro-fn28">28.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Mary Pomeroy letter to Jonathan Haslam, November 1995 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn29" id="intro-fn29">29.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In early 1940 Carr objected to certain additions being proposed in order to update his <span class="italic">International Relations Since the Peace Treaties</span>. Significantly, he did so in part because these new ‘references to the United States’ struck him as being ‘both inadequate and to put it mildly, unsympathetic in tone’. He continued ‘I should particularly dislike it if a book for which I retain, in any event, a large share of the responsibility, contained passages about the United States which would inevitably provoke and irritate any American reader into whom whose hands they might fall’. Letter from E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 12 February 1940 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn30" id="intro-fn30">30.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">As part of his ongoing campaign against Carr, Lord Davies raised the issue of Carr’s critical attitude towards the American President. Over six years after Carr’s appointment, he wrote ‘I repeat I don’t know what his [Carr’s] policies are, but as you suggest they are anti-Wilson, [and] it seems curious that the Professor [Carr] should be content to occupy the Wilson Chair —’ See his correspondence with Gilbert Murray, 5 June 1943 (UWA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn31" id="intro-fn31">31.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quote from E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">From Napoleon to Stalin and other Essays</span> (London: Macmillan, 1980), p. 7.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn32" id="intro-fn32">32.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">John Hallett (E. H. Carr), ‘Nationalism: the World’s Bane’, <span class="italic">Fortnightly</span>, June 1932, pp. 694–702.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn33" id="intro-fn33">33.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See John Hallett, ‘England Adrift’, <span class="italic">Fortnightly</span>, September 1930, pp. 354–62.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn34" id="intro-fn34">34.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Professor E. H. Carr, ‘What Are We fighting For?’ Record of meeting held at Chatham House, 14 August 1940 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn35" id="intro-fn35">35.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Untitled draft dated June 1944, 12pp (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn36" id="intro-fn36">36.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Memorandum from Mr E. H. Carr to Mr Barrington-Ward, 5 August 1940 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn37" id="intro-fn37">37.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See, for example, John Hallett (E. H. Carr), ‘The Poets of Soviet Russia’, <span class="italic">The Christian Science Monitor</span>, 25 April 1929, and ‘The Soviets Through Soviet Eyes’, <span class="italic">The Spectator</span>, 14 September 1934.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn38" id="intro-fn38">38.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See E. H. Carr, Dostoevsky, 1821–1881 (London: Unwin Books, 1931), <span class="italic">The Romantic Exiles</span> (London: Victor Gollancz, 1933) and <span class="italic">Michael Bakunin</span> (London: Macmillan, 1937).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn39" id="intro-fn39">39.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘An Autobiography’, pp. xvi-xvii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn40" id="intro-fn40">40.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Professor E. H. Carr, ‘Impressions of a Visit to Russia and Germany’. Lecture given at Chatham House, London, 12 October 1937 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn41" id="intro-fn41">41.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For a detailed analysis of Carr’s position or positions on the USSR see R. W. Davies, ‘Carr’s Changing Views of the Soviet Union’, in Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span>, pp. 91–108.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn42" id="intro-fn42">42.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">Karl Marx: a Study in Fanaticism</span> (London: J. M. Dent, 1934).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn43" id="intro-fn43">43.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">John Hallett (E. H. Carr), ‘Karl Marx – Fifty Years Later’, <span class="italic">Fortnightly</span>, March 1933, pp. 311–21.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn44" id="intro-fn44">44.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Two of the books which influenced Carr most were Reinhold Niebuhr, <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society: a Study in Ethics and Politics</span> (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1932) and Karl Mannheim, <span class="italic">Ideology and Utopia: an Introduction to the Sociology of Knowledge</span> (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner &amp; Co., 1936). In 1949 Carr spoke warmly of Niebuhr’s critical insights into the modern condition. See his ‘The Moral Foundations for World Order’, in E. L. Woodward et al., Foundations for World Order (Denver, Colorado: University of Denver Press, 1949), pp. 58–9. In 1953 Carr also wrote a highly sympathetic appreciation of Mannheim. Carr’s description of Mannheim could have almost been autobiographical. He wrote that while Mannheim ‘was never a Marxist — the Marxist foundations of his thought went deep’. See his ‘Karl Mannheim’ in E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">From Napoleon to Stalin</span>, pp. 177–83. See also Charles Jones, ‘Carr, Mannheim and a Post-Positivist Science of International Relations’, <span class="italic">Political Studies</span>, Vol. XLV, 1997, pp. 232–46.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn45" id="intro-fn45">45.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quote from his letter to Stanley Hoffman, 30 September 1977 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn46" id="intro-fn46">46.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘An Autobiography’, pp. xvi-xvii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn47" id="intro-fn47">47.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Martin Wight, <span class="italic">International Theory: the Three Traditions</span> (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1991), p. 267</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn48" id="intro-fn48">48.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Whittle Johnson, ‘Carr’s Theory of International Relations’, <span class="italic">The Journal of Politics</span>, Vol. 29, 1967, pp. 861–84. Johnson is right to suggest that <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> does not present a unified view of this crisis. He is wrong to say that Carr therefore has ‘two theories of international relations’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn49" id="intro-fn49">49.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">As early as October 1937, Carr was anticipating a possible rapprochement between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany. See his ‘Impressions of a Visit to Russia and Germany’, pp. 27–8</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn50" id="intro-fn50">50.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Carr discusses the British security dilemma in his <span class="italic">Britain: a Study of Foreign Policy</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn51" id="intro-fn51">51.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘For by contrast with Carr’s other works, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> is drenched in erudition’. Charles Jones, <span class="italic">E. H. Carr and International Relations: Duty to Lie</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), p. 46.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn52" id="intro-fn52">52.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter from E. H. Carr to Harold Macmillan, 31 May 1939 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn53" id="intro-fn53">53.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The issue of power and security, and how to employ force in the cause of peace, was one that increasingly preoccupied the thoughts of a number of Carr’s ‘utopians’, including Lord David Davies. Throughout the 1930s others like Robert Cecil and Gilbert Murray also began to grapple with the same issue. See Martin Ceadel, <span class="italic">Semi-Detached Idealists: the British Peace Movement and International Relations, 1854–1945</span> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 276–7.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn54" id="intro-fn54">54.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See the essays in Peter Wilson and David Long (eds), <span class="italic">Thinkers of the Twenty Years’ Crisis: Inter-War Idealism Reassessed</span> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn55" id="intro-fn55">55.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘It is thus rather curious that Carr remains celebrated for his staunch realist critique of idealism’. Stefano Guzzini, <span class="italic">Realism in International Relations and International Political Economy: the Continuing Story of a Death Foretold</span> (London: Routledge, 1999), p. 22.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn56" id="intro-fn56">56.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For a later elaboration of Carr’s vision for the post-war world see ‘Memorandum From Mr Carr To Mr Barrington–Ward’, 5 August 1940 (CPB)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn57" id="intro-fn57">57.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In 1980 he recalled that ‘the war came as shock which numbed the thinking process’ cited in ‘An Autobiography’, Michael Cox (ed.), E. H. Carr, p. xix.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn58" id="intro-fn58">58.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See his <span class="italic">Britain: a Study of Foreign Policy From the Versailles Treaty to the Outbreak of War</span> (London: Longmans, Green &amp; Co. 1939).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn59" id="intro-fn59">59.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Carr later wrote: ‘I remember seeing the guarantee of 1 April 1939, to Poland as the final recipe for disaster. We could not possibly implement it except in alliance with Russia and it was given in such a way to as to preclude any agreement’. See ‘An Autobiography’, Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr</span>, p. xix.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn60" id="intro-fn60">60.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">These reviews can be found in <span class="italic">Times Literary Supplement</span>, 11 November 1939, p. 65; Richard Coventry (Crossman), ‘The Illusions of Power’, <span class="italic">New Statesman</span>, XVIII, November 25, 1939; <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, Vol. 18, No. 3, April 1940, p. 564; and Crane Brinton, ‘Power and Morality in Foreign Policies’, <span class="italic">Saturday Review</span>, 17 February 1940, p. 19. The review of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> by William P. Maddox can be found in <span class="italic">American Political Science Review</span>, Vol. 34, No. 3, 1940, pp. 587–8.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn61" id="intro-fn61">61.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See his letter to Macmillan where he criticizes his publishers for not maintaining stocks of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in the London bookshops! 2 December 1939 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn62" id="intro-fn62">62.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quotes from his memorandum to Barrington-Ward, 5 August 1940 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn63" id="intro-fn63">63.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Carr had earlier attacked Arnold Toynbee’s views on world politics in <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, Vol. XVI, March 1937, pp. 281–3.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn64" id="intro-fn64">64.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For a more detailed discussion of Carr’s early critics see Peter Wilson, ‘The Myth of the “First Great Debate"’, in Tim Dunne, Michael Cox and Ken Booth (eds), <span class="italic">The Eighty Years’ Crisis: International Relations 1919–1999</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), pp. 1–6, and his ‘Carr and his Early Critics: Responses to <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, 1939–1946’, in Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span>, pp. 165–97.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn65" id="intro-fn65">65.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Brian Schmidt, <span class="italic">The Political Discourse of Anarchy: a Disciplinary History of International Relations</span> (New York: State University of New York Press, 1998).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn66" id="intro-fn66">66.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See ‘An Autobiography’, in Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span>, p. xix.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn67" id="intro-fn67">67.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See C. A. W. Manning’s review of E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace</span> (London: Macmillan, 1942) in <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, Vol. XIX, No. 8, June 1942, pp. 443–4.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn68" id="intro-fn68">68.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Conditions of Peace, p. xxiii, n. 2.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn69" id="intro-fn69">69.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Jonathan Haslam, <span class="italic">The Vices of Integrity: E. H. Carr 1892–1982</span> (London: Verso, 1999), pp. 96–100.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn70" id="intro-fn70">70.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis 1919–1939: an Introduction to the Study of International Relations</span> (London: Macmillan, 2nd edition, 1946) with a ‘Preface To Second Edition’ completed by Carr on 15 November 1945. See p. viii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn71" id="intro-fn71">71.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span> (London: Macmillan, 1945).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn72" id="intro-fn72">72.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">How significant Carr regarded the publication of what he termed – without irony – his ‘magnum opus’ on <span class="italic">A History of Soviet Russia</span> can be gleaned from letters sent to his publishers on 12 August 1949 and 21 April 1950 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn73" id="intro-fn73">73.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Carr referred to <span class="italic">The Soviet Impact on the Western World</span> as ‘the sort of book which one wants to be got out quickly’. Letter to Macmillan Publishers, 21 May 1946 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn74" id="intro-fn74">74.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">F. A. Hayek, <span class="italic">The Road To Serfdom</span> (London: George Routledge &amp; Sons Ltd. 1944), pp. 138–41.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn75" id="intro-fn75">75.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Michael Ignatieff, <span class="italic">Isaiah Berlin</span> (London: Chatto &amp; Windus, 1998), pp. 235–6.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn76" id="intro-fn76">76.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Charles Jones, “’An Active Danger”: E. H. Carr at <span class="italic">The Times</span>’, in Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span>, pp. 68–87.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn77" id="intro-fn77">77.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See, for example, E. H. Carr, ‘The Russian Revolution and the West’, New Left Review, Number 111, September-October 1978, pp. 25–36.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn78" id="intro-fn78">78.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For a guide see William C. Olson, ‘The Growth of the Discipline’, in Brian Porter (ed.), <span class="italic">The Aberystwyth Papers: International Politics 1919–1969</span> (London: Oxford University Press, 1972), pp. 3–29.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn79" id="intro-fn79">79.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See W. A. Griswold, review of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, featured as a sales puff in the American edition of the volume which was published in 1964 by Harper &amp; Row Publishers of New York.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn80" id="intro-fn80">80.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter from E. H. Carr to Mr Macmillan, 2 April 1948 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn81" id="intro-fn81">81.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Letter from E. H. Carr to Mr Macmillan, 14 June 1948 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn82" id="intro-fn82">82.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">One of Carr’s strongest American defenders (who later helped set up the British Committee on the Theory of International Relations) was nonetheless compelled to criticize his work for its ‘Marxist orientation’. See Kenneth Thompson, <span class="italic">Masters of International Thought</span> (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1980), p. 77.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn83" id="intro-fn83">83.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See the first edition of Hans J. Morgenthau’s classic <span class="italic">Power Among Nations: the Struggle for Power and Peace</span> (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1948). In this Morgenthau recommends readers to look at <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> for the light it throws on ‘the intellectual problems to which the study of international politics give rise’. At another point he cites the same book as being one of a few that dealt seriously with the role of ‘political power’ in world affairs. Elsewhere he briefly mentions Carr’s views on ‘morality’, even though he does not happen to agree with them. See pp. 177, 475, 478, 481, 482, 483.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn84" id="intro-fn84">84.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. B. J. Walker, ‘History and Structure in International Relations’, in James DerDerian (ed.), <span class="italic">International Theory: Critical Investigations</span> (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1995), pp. 332–3.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn85" id="intro-fn85">85.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Compare the similarities between <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> with Hans J. Morgenthau, <span class="italic">Scientific Man vs Power Politics</span> (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1946).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn86" id="intro-fn86">86.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hans J. Morgenthau, ‘The Political Science of E. H. Carr’, <span class="italic">World Politics</span>, Volume I, No. 1, 1948, pp. 127–34. A shortened version of the same article was later reissued under the more pungent title, ‘The Surrender to the Immanence of Power: E. H. Carr’ in H. J. Morgenthau (ed.), <span class="italic">Dilemmas of Politics</span> (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1962), pp. 350–7.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn87" id="intro-fn87">87.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Chris Brown, <span class="italic">Understanding International Relations</span> (Basingstoke: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1997; 2nd edn, 2001), pp. 31–2.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn88" id="intro-fn88">88.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See the comment by Daniel H. Deudney, ‘Regrounding Realism: Anarchy, Security, and Changing Material Context’, <span class="italic">Security Studies</span>, Vol. 10, No. 1, Autumn 2000, p. 19.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn89" id="intro-fn89">89.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Whittle Johnston, ‘E. H. Carr’s Theory of International Relations: a Critique’, <span class="italic">The Journal of Politics</span>, Vol. 29, No. 4, November 1967, pp. 861–84.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn90" id="intro-fn90">90.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Robert Gilpin referred to Carr (alongside Thucydides and Machiavelli) as one of the ‘three great realist writers’. He later noted that he found in Carr’s work ‘one of the greatest inspiration for his own scribblings in the field’ and ‘incorporated Carr’s analysis of the relationship of international economic and politics into his own work’. See his ‘The Richness of the Tradition of Political Realism’ in Robert Keohane (ed.), <span class="italic">Neorealism and its Critics</span> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986), pp. 306, 309. On Gilpin’s debt to Carr see his <span class="italic">Global Political Economy: Understanding the International Economic Order</span> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), pp. 100–1, n.52.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn91" id="intro-fn91">91.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Carr’ also had ‘the distinction’, according to a British academic, of ‘writing one of the few books on international relations, which despite its subject matter, one might read for pleasure’. See Michael Nicholson, <span class="italic">Formal Theories in International Relations</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), pp. 26–7, n.1.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn92" id="intro-fn92">92.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Stanley Hoffman, ‘An American Social Science: International Relations’, <span class="italic">Daedalus</span>, Vol. 106, No. 3, Summer 1997, pp. 41–60</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn93" id="intro-fn93">93.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Daniel Deudney notes that Carr managed to ignore the ‘early literature of geopolitics’ produced by German writers associated with the Institute of Geopolitics in Munich. See his ‘Geopolitics and Change’, in Michael Doyle and G. John Ikenberry (eds), <span class="italic">New Thinking in International Relations Theory</span> (Colorado: Westview Press, 1997), p. 51.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn94" id="intro-fn94">94.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See, for example, Steve Smith, ‘International Relations: still an American Social Science?’, <span class="italic">British Journal of Politics and International Relations</span>, Vol. 2, No. 3, October 2000, pp. 376–9.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn95" id="intro-fn95">95.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Brian C. Schmidt, <span class="italic">The Political Discourse of Anarchy: a Disciplinary History of International Relations</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn96" id="intro-fn96">96.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">On the ways in which Carr was read or misread in the United States see the suggestive comments by James Der Derian, ‘A Reinterpretation of Realism’ in his <span class="italic">International Theory: Critical Investigations</span>, pp. 363–96 and Vendulka Kubalkova ‘<span class="italic">The Twenty Years</span>’ Catharsis: E. H. Carr and IR’ in Vendulka Kubalkova, Nicholas Onuf and Paul Kowert (eds), <span class="italic">International Relations in a Constructed World</span> (New York: M. E. Sharpe, 1998), pp. 25–57.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn97" id="intro-fn97">97.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Joseph Grieco, ‘Realist International Theory and the Study of World Politics’, in Michael Doyle and G. John Ikenberry (eds), New <span class="italic">Thinking in International Relations Theory</span> (Colorado: Westview Press, 1997), p. 107. Grieco argues that Carr remains a realist because he argues that ‘states coexist in a context of international anarchy’ in the ‘shadow of war’ (p. 107). See also the ways in which Carr’s theory of power and peaceful change is employed by Randall L. Schweller and William C. Wohlforth, ‘Evaluating Realism in Response to the End of the Cold War’, <span class="italic">Security Studies</span>, Vol. 9, No. 3, Spring 2000, pp. 60–107.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn98" id="intro-fn98">98.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Graham Evans, ‘All States are Equal but—’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 7, 1981, p. 62.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn99" id="intro-fn99">99.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. D. B. Miller, ‘E. H. Carr: The Realist’s Realist’, <span class="italic">The National Interest</span>, Fall 1991, pp. 65–71.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn100" id="intro-fn100">100.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See John Rawls, <span class="italic">The Law of Peoples</span> (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999), p. 6 n.8, Peter Wilson, ‘E. H. Carr: the Revolutionist’s Realist’, Unpublished Ms, 2000, l6pp, and William C. Olson and A. J. R. Groom, <span class="italic">International Relations: Then and Now: Origins and Trends in Interpretation</span> (London: Routledge, 1991), p. 93.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn101" id="intro-fn101">101.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Michael Doyle, ‘Peace, Liberty and Democracy: Realists and Liberals Contest a Legacy’, in Michael Cox, G. John Ikenberry and Takashi Inoguchi (eds), <span class="italic">American Democracy Promotion: Impulses, Strategies, and Impacts</span> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 23–7, and Michael Joseph Smith, <span class="italic">Realist Thought from Weber to Kissinger</span> (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1986), p. 2.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn102" id="intro-fn102">102.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Justin Rosenberg, <span class="italic">The Empire of Civil Society: a Critique of the Realist Theory of International Relations</span> (London: Verso, 1994), pp. 9–37</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn103" id="intro-fn103">103.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Ken Booth, What is His Story? Remarks for the Roundtable, E. H. Carr – The Aberystwyth Years: 1936–1947. Unpublished Manuscript, 13 July 1997. Presented to E. H. Carr: A Critical Reassessment. An International Symposium.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn104" id="intro-fn104">104.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See, for example, his review of Hans J. Morgenthan’s book on American foreign policy published in <span class="italic">The Listener</span>, 15 May 1952.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn105" id="intro-fn105">105.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The manuscript by C. A. W. Manning was <span class="italic">The Nature of International Society</span> published in 1962 and reissued in 1975. Letter E. H. Carr to Macmillan Publishers, 23 January 1961 (MAB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn106" id="intro-fn106">106.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Brian Porter (ed.), <span class="italic">The Aberystwyth Papers: International Politics, 1919–69</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn107" id="intro-fn107">107.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Dr E. H. Carr (United Kingdom) ‘<span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>’. Lecture delivered on 18 July 1957, NATO Unclassified, 18pp (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn108" id="intro-fn108">108.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The only positive comments that Carr ever uttered about international relations in Britain that I have been able to track down can be found in his ‘Academic Questions’, <span class="italic">Times Literary Supplement</span>, 16 April 1954.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn109" id="intro-fn109">109.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The letter was from Martin Wight and is quoted in Tim Dunne, <span class="italic">Inventing International Society: a History of the English School</span> (Basingstoke: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1998), p. 93.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn110" id="intro-fn110">110.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The term Hobbesian was, of course, used by Martin Wight to describe the ‘brilliant’ <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in his ‘Western Values in International Relations’, in Herbert Butterfield and Martin Wight (eds), <span class="italic">Diplomatic Investigations: Essays in the Theory in International Relations</span> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1966), p. 121.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn111" id="intro-fn111">111.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Martin Wight ‘The Realist’s Utopia’, <span class="italic">Observer</span>, 21 July 1946, p. 3.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn112" id="intro-fn112">112.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Roger Epp, ‘Martin Wight: International Relations as a realm of persuasion’, in F. A. Beer and R. Hariman (eds), <span class="italic">Post-realism: the Rhetorical Turn in International Relations</span> (East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press, 1996), p. 122.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn113" id="intro-fn113">113.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Martin Wight, <span class="italic">Power Politics</span> (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1979), pp. 19, 213.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn114" id="intro-fn114">114.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Martin Wight, ‘An Anatomy of International Thought’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 13, 1987, p. 222.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn115" id="intro-fn115">115.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Carr’s critique of Herbert Butterfield as an anti-progressive historian in his <span class="italic">The New Society</span> (London: Macmillan, 1951), pp. 4–9, 16.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn116" id="intro-fn116">116.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For Carr’s attacks on Butterfield see E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">What Is History?</span> (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1961), pp. 19, 41–2, 51, 74, 121.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn117" id="intro-fn117">117.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For a sympathetic assessment of Butterfield see Ian Hall, ‘Historical Learning and Historical Thinking: Sir Herbert Butterfield and International Relations’, <span class="italic">Review of International Relations</span>, 2002.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn118" id="intro-fn118">118.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Herbert Butterfield, ‘What is History?’, <span class="italic">The Cambridge Review</span>, 2 December 1961.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn119" id="intro-fn119">119.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">An important fact recalled by Ian Hall in his ‘Still the English patient? Closures and inventions in the English School’, <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, Vol. 77, No. 3, 2001, p. 504.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn120" id="intro-fn120">120.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Apart from Carr, others not invited to attend the meetings of the British Committee included Harry Hinsley, then lecturer in History at Cambridge, and C. A. W. Manning, Montagu Burton Professor of International Relations at the LSE,1930–62.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn121" id="intro-fn121">121.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quote from Kai Alderson and Andrew Hurrell (eds), <span class="italic">Hedley Bull On International Society</span> (Basingstoke: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 2000), p. 125.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn122" id="intro-fn122">122.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Peter Wilson, ‘The Peculiar Realism of E. H. Carr’, <span class="italic">Millennium</span>, Vol. 30, No. 1, 2001, p. 125.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn123" id="intro-fn123">123.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span>, p. 42, n.1.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn124" id="intro-fn124">124.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Manning’s book was entitled <span class="italic">The Nature of International Society</span> and was finally published in 1962 and reissued by Macmillan in 1975. Carr knew and liked Manning and found him and his ideas to be both ‘original and stimulating’; but his basic argument about the existence of an ‘international society’ was quite simply wrong in his view. Carr wrote: ‘My fundamental criticism of this thesis is that the international game implied by it is in fact a creation of small and influential groups in the western world during the past 400 years, and there is no reason to suppose that it will survive the decline of these groups.’ He also added that Manning wrote in an ‘abstract, elusive, hair-splitting style’ and that the ‘manuscript scarcely’ contained ‘a proper name from beginning to end’. See letter from E. H. Carr to Macmillan Publishers, 23 January 1961 (CPB).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn125" id="intro-fn125">125.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Cited in letter from E. H. Carr to Stanley Hoffman, 30 September 1977.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn126" id="intro-fn126">126.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Cecilia Lynch, ‘E. H. Carr, International Relations Theory and the Societal Origins of International Legal Norms’, <span class="italic">Millennium</span>, Vol. 23, No. 3, 1994, pp. 589–620.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn127" id="intro-fn127">127.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Robert Jackson in <span class="italic">American Political Science Review</span>, Vol. 94, No. 3, September 2000, pp. 763–4.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn128" id="intro-fn128">128.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For an alternative view, see Tim Dunne, <span class="italic">Inventing International Society</span>, p. 13, and Charles Jones, ‘Christianity in the English School: Deleted but not Expunged’. Paper given at the International Studies Association, Annual Conference, Chicago, 21–4 February 2001, p. 3.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn129" id="intro-fn129">129.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The discussion about Carr’s relationship to the English School can be followed in the journal <span class="italic">Cooperation and Conflict</span>, Vol. 35, No. 2, June 2000, pp. 193–237, with contributions by Tonny Brems Knudsen, Samuel M. Makinda, Hidemi Suganami and Tim Dunne.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn130" id="intro-fn130">130.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Robert W. Cox and Timothy J. Sinclair, <span class="italic">Approaches to World Order</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, l996), p. 27.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn131" id="intro-fn131">131.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Robert W. Cox, <span class="italic">Production Power and World Order: Social Forces in the Making of History</span> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1987), p. 157.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn132" id="intro-fn132">132.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See, in particular, Graham Evans, ‘E. H. Carr and International Relations’, <span class="italic">British Journal of International Studies</span>, Vol. 1, No. 2, 1975, pp. 77–97.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn133" id="intro-fn133">133.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Robert W. Cox, <span class="italic">Production, Power and World Order</span>, pp. 49–50, 86, 91, 100, 117, 169, 400, 502.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn134" id="intro-fn134">134.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Andrew Linklater, ‘The Transformation of Political Community: E. H. Carr and Critical Theory and International Relations’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 23, 1997, pp. 321–8.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn135" id="intro-fn135">135.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Andrew Linklater, <span class="italic">Beyond Realism and Marxism: Critical Theory and International Relations</span> (London: Macmillan, 1990). See also his later <span class="italic">The Transformation of Political Community: Ethical Foundations of the post-Westphalian Era</span> (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn136" id="intro-fn136">136.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Ken Booth, ‘Security and Self: Reflections of Falllen Realist’, in Keith Krause and Michael C. Williams (eds), <span class="italic">Critical Security Studies</span> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997) pp. 83–120.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn137" id="intro-fn137">137.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">For an earlier discussion by Booth of Carr who recognized that all ‘sound political thought must be based on elements of reality and utopia’ see his ‘1931 + 50: It’s Later than we Think’, in David R. Jones (ed.) <span class="italic">Soviet Armed Forces Review</span>, Vol. 5 (Gulf Breeze FL: Academic International Press, 1981), pp. 31–49.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn138" id="intro-fn138">138.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Ken Booth, ‘Security in Anarchy: Utopian Realism in Theory and Practice’, <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, Vol. 67, No. 3, 1991, pp. 527–45.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn139" id="intro-fn139">139.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Isaiah Berlin, ‘Mr Carr’s Big Batallions’, <span class="italic">New Statesman</span>, 5 January 1962.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn140" id="intro-fn140">140.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Charles Jones, <span class="italic">E. H. Carr and International Relations: a Duty to Lie</span> and Tim Dunne, Michael Cox and Ken Booth (eds), The <span class="italic">Eighty Years’ Crisis: International Relations 1919–1999</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn141" id="intro-fn141">141.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Jonathan Haslam, <span class="italic">The Vices of Integrity: E. H. Carr</span>, 1892–1982.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn142" id="intro-fn142">142.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span> (Basingstoke: Macmilan Press – now Palgrave, 2000).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn143" id="intro-fn143">143.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Duncan S. A. Bell, ‘International Relations: the Dawn of a Historiographic Turn?’, <span class="italic">British Journal of Politics and International Relations</span>, Vol. 3, No. 1, April 2000, p. 122.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn144" id="intro-fn144">144.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Thucydides, <span class="italic">History of the Peloponnesian Wars</span> (New York: Penguin, 1972), I. 22.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn145" id="intro-fn145">145.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">G. John Ikenberry, <span class="italic">After Victory: Institutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding of Order After Major Wars</span> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), p. 3.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn146" id="intro-fn146">146.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Ian Clark, <span class="italic">The Post-Cold War Order: the Spoils of Peace</span> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn147" id="intro-fn147">147.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See Alexander Wendt, <span class="italic">The Social Theory of International Politics</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 195–6.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#intro_fn148" id="intro-fn148">148.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Francis Fukuyama, ‘The End of History’, <span class="italic">The National Interest</span>, Vol. 16, Summer 1989, pp. 3–18.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>