<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterTitle1">A Brief Guide to the Writings of E. H. Carr</p>
<p class="NoIndent">E. H. Carr wrote so much on so many diverse subjects, over such a long period of time, and for so many different audiences, that it is not at all easy to situate him within any particular academic discipline. Indeed, in some ways it is not even accurate to call him an academic, given his many careers and interests; nor to be true to Carr’s own wishes should we even refer to him as a member of the ‘IR’ community. In fact, he did not much like the idea of international relations as a subject and said so on numerous occasions. Yet it is as the author of one of its classical foundational texts that he is perhaps best known today.</p>
<p class="para">So how should we read Carr and make sense of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>? One very obvious way of doing so is to get some idea of what he wrote and what he did over his whole life, spanning the period from 1916 – when he took up his position in the Foreign Office – to 1982 when he died at the age of 90. Indeed, it is crucial to do so, for only by setting his famous study within his larger oeuvre can we fully appreciate the true significance of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> as one of several attempts made by Carr to make sense of a world turned upside down by one war and the threat and reality of another, the collapse of old economic certainties and the challenge posed by the Soviet Union – not in any military sense but as an ideological alternative. Martin Wight once observed that Carr’s <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was the product of diseased times. It would be more accurate to say that all of his work is a response to truly revolutionary times.</p>
<p class="para">The first 20 years of his active professional life, however, were spent within the cloistered confines of an elite British Foreign Office. From this privileged, and at times influential vantage point he studied and advised successive governments about the Russian revolution, the Versailles Peace Treaty, the formation and evolution of the League of Nations, the world depression, the rise of Hitler, and how Britain in the early stages of decline as he perceived it – ought to respond to the threat posed by Germany in the 1930s. The last issue in particular was of special concern to Carr. A close confidante to those within the British foreign policy establishment who had been keen to pursue a policy of de’tente with Hitler, he saw <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> not as an attempt to provide further justification for a strategy that had manifestly failed by the time the book was first published in November 1939 – the standard view – but as a retrospective critique of those who had palpably failed to do so before 1938. Certainly, without recognizing the very special relationship Carr enjoyed with at least some of those who wielded power and made policy, it is virtually impossible to understand how and why he wrote <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, a work which was at once a fairly abstract discourse on the nature of international relations – his preferred title for the book was <span class="italic">Utopia and Reality</span> – and also a very direct intervention (admittedly after the policy of appeasement had been abandoned) into the key international debates of the day.</p>
<p class="para">Carr, though, was no ordinary diplomat, and while still serving in the Foreign Office he became increasingly interested in Russian literary and revolutionary politics in general, and Karl Marx in particular – not exactly the normal topics of conversation within the British diplomatic corps. These formed the basis of four biographical studies written in the space of just six years, between 1931 and 1937, a remarkable output by any measure. These included <span class="italic">Dostoevsky 1821–1881</span> (1931; 1949; London: Unwin, 1962), a political and psychological portrait of the great Russian novelist; <span class="italic">The Romantic Exiles</span> (1933; London: Serif, 1998), which examined the wonderful and bizarre world of Russian revolutionary exiles in Europe in the mid-nineteenth century; <span class="italic">Karl Marx: a Story in Fanaticism</span> (London: J. M. Dent, 1934), in which Carr looked critically at the life and works of what he called ‘this orderly German’; and <span class="italic">Michael Bakunin</span> (London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1937), a fascinating study of the Russian anarchist. It was not insignificant that Carr chose not to write about conventional figures, but rather those whom he later described as ‘living outside the charmed circle’. But it was not the scientific Marx who influenced him most (though he did influence Carr a good deal more than later commentators have recognized), but his immersion in the world of Russian nineteenth-century intellectuals, even those ‘who were not in any strict sense revolutionaries at all’. As he later confessed, it was when reading these writers and thinking about their world – one that was so different to his own – that he began to reflect critically about the ‘liberal moralistic ideology’ that had so far formed the ideological bedrock of his own outlook.</p>
<p class="para">Carr thus left the Foreign Office in 1936 a very different person than when he had joined it 20 years earlier. But in the end, however, it was not so much his sympathy for Russian intellectuals but his desire to speak more freely about what he saw as the drift in British foreign policy that led him to resign from the Foreign Office in early 1936 and take up the Woodrow Wilson Chair in International Politics in Aberystwyth. Here he remained on and off until 1947, in the process writing several books, six of which were published by Macmillan: the biography of <span class="italic">Michael Bakunin</span> (1937), which was not a good seller; his textbook on the inter-war period, <span class="italic">International Relations Since the Peace Treaties</span> (1937; after 1947 <span class="italic">International Relations Between The Wars, 1919–1939</span>), which sold well; <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> (1939); <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace</span> (1942), perhaps his most trenchant statement about the world crisis, which also contains a powerful critique of liberal political economy; <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span> (1945), in which he put forward his most radical thoughts to date on international security without the nation-state; and <span class="italic">The Soviet Impact on the Western World</span> (1946), which despite its pro-Soviet leanings (Stalin, he claimed, had placed ‘democracy at the forefront of allied war aims’) did contain some important insights about the ways in which the West had evolved since 1917 in direct response to the challenge posed by the USSR. His other works included his largely ignored but significant 1939 study entitled <span class="italic">Britain: a Study of Foreign Policy from the Versailles Peace Treaty to the Outbreak of War</span> (London: Longmans, Green &amp; Co, 1939), and his early statement on the failure of the nation-state, <span class="italic">The Future of Nations: Independence or Interdependence?</span> (London: Kegan Paul, 1941). Three other studies also deserve brief mention here, all of which were composed after he had resigned from Aberystwyth: <span class="italic">Studies in Revolution</span> (1950), a series of 14 essays, most of which had first appeared in the <span class="italic">Times Literary Supplement; The New Society</span> (1951), in which he declared his faith in progress and defined freedom as ‘the opportunity for creative activity’; and <span class="italic">German–Soviet Relations Between the Wars, 1919–1939</span> (1952), a standard diplomatic account of a crucial relationship.</p>
<p class="para">As this prodigious output might suggest, Carr was not an average academic. The Wilson Chair moreover was not the standard academic posting and it left him free most of the time to pursue his other interests as a journalist, reviewer and highly active member of various discussion groups at Chatham House in London. Through this latter vehicle he also helped clarify his own ideas on two especially important problems – peaceful change and nationalism – both of which figure prominently in the final draft of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. He also managed to maintain very close contacts with those who remained at the heart of the British political class. It came as no great surprise, therefore, when he was asked to join the Ministry of Information in 1940 in order to be able to play his part in the war he had hoped Britain might have avoided (at least until 1938) by appeasing Germany. However, realizing that the post did not give him a sufficiently important platform from which to express his views, he decided to take up a position as Assistant Editor and leader writer with <span class="italic">The Times</span>. This was a critical move, and from this largely anonymous position he set out to shape the debates about the future of Britain and its position within the larger post-war world. Broadly progressive in politics with little faith left in the private enterprise system, Carr inevitably upset Conservatives on the Right. What upset them more, perhaps, was his continued advocacy of good relations with the Soviet Union, even after the war had come to an end and given way to a Cold War for which he largely (though not completely) blamed the West.</p>
<p class="para">In 1945 Carr took a decision that was to determine the course of the rest of his life. Convinced now that the three most important events of the twentieth century were the Russian revolution of 1917, its entry into the war in 1941, and its emergence as some sort of ‘superpower’ by 1945, Carr turned his attention away from the world of international politics to write what he hoped would become the definitive history of the early Soviet Union. The final result was to be ten volumes spanning the period 1917–1929. Three dealt with the early years – <span class="italic">The Bolshevik Revolution 1917–1923</span> (1950, 1952, 1953), one with the transition from Lenin to Stalin – <span class="italic">The Interregnum 1923–1924</span> (1954), three with the middle period of the 1920s – <span class="italic">Socialism In One Country, 1924–1926</span> (1958, 1959, 1964), and another three with the new system in formation – <span class="italic">The Foundations of a Planned Economy, 1926–1929</span> (1969, 1971 and 1978), two of which he co-authored with R. W. Davies (all London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave). He also published three related volumes: <span class="italic">The Russian Revolution from Lenin to Stalin, 1917–1929</span> (1979), <span class="italic">The Twilight of the Comintern, 1930–1935</span> (1982), and <span class="italic">The Comintern and the Spanish Civil War</span> (1983) (all London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave). Olympian was the word most frequently used to describe the achievement, and Olympian it most certainly was, especially when we consider that the first of these many volumes was not published until 1950 when Carr was already 58. Little wonder that even he at times felt that the whole project had got completely out of hand.</p>
<p class="para">If Carr had ever been asked what his most important contribution to human knowledge had been, he certainly would not have replied <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Nor would he even have included his hugely influential but relatively short book on the study of history, <span class="italic">What Is History?</span> (London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1961), which went on to sell over a quarter of a million copies in the English language, as well as being translated into 25 others, including Russian and Georgian in 1998, Lithuanian and Korean in 2000, and Macedonian in 2001. First, he would have mentioned his magnum opus on Soviet Russia, a study that dealt in minute detail with the ways in which economic and international realities in the end modified and altered the high ideals of its revolutionary founders. Second, he would have cited (and did in 1980) his now out-of-print and almost impossible to obtain biography of the anarchist Michael Bakunin – a utopian dreamer if ever there was one, whose love of liberty if not understanding of the ‘real’ world inspired Carr to write about him with such great sympathy.</p>
<p class="para">About <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> he seemed to have no strong opinions at all, even though the complex relationship between the world as it is and the world as it might be – or, as Carr might have put it, between reality and utopia – forms the philosophical foundations upon which it is constructed. But Carr never appeared to see it as anything but a particular type of book written under very peculiar and extreme circumstances. As he noted in the preface to the 1981 printing of the volume, by the end of the war <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> ‘was already a period piece and such it remains’. It might ‘perhaps retain a wider significance’, he continued, but one should never forget that it was first and foremost ‘an attempt to navigate then relatively unchartered waters’ and should be judged in those terms. Whether or not he succeeded in his navigational efforts remains an open question. <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, after all, was never an easy book, nor did it ever lack for critics. Its influence, however, can hardly be denied. Reprinted four times within six months of its publication in late 1939, it went through no less than 17 reprintings between 1946 and 1984. By 2000 it had also been translated into seven languages, including Japanese, German, Portuguese, Greek, Swedish, Spanish and Korean, thus making it one of the best known books on international relations in the world.</p>

<br class="end-page"/></div>