<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterTitle1">Glossary of Names</p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Sir Norman Angell (1873–1967)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British economist and worker for international peace who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1933. Angell is best known for his book The Great Illusion (1909), which marked a turning point for peace theory by seeking to refute the argument that conquest and war brought a nation great economic advantage. Angell attempted to show the opposite – that war could never profit anyone. In <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> Carr attacked Angell for believing that war arose as a result of ‘a lack of understanding’. Angell in turn thought Carr’s book to be ‘completely mischievous — a piece of sophisticated moral nihilism’, and later went on to strongly criticize it in his <span class="italic">Why Freedom Matters</span>, published in 1940. In this he referred to Carr, amongst other things, as being one of ‘Hitler’s intellectual allies in Britain’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Arthur Balfour (1848–1940)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British Conservative prime minister from 1902–05. Balfour was brought into the coalition Cabinet as foreign secretary in 1916, and was a member of the British delegation at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Edvard Benes (1884–1948)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Statesman, foreign minister, and founder of modern Czechoslovakia who forged its Western-oriented foreign policy between the First and Second World Wars but was forced to capitulate to Hitler’s demands during the Czech crisis in 1938. As foreign minister he represented his country at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, and championed the League of Nations throughout the inter-war period. He was to become president of Czechoslovakia in 1935.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Economist, political and legal philosopher and social reformer, Bentham was the principal exponent of utilitarianism – a philosophy expressed in the idea that the best outcome in any society was that which provided the ‘greatest good for the greatest number’. Bentham, according to Carr, took the eighteenth-century doctrine of reason and refashioned it to the needs of the nineteenth century. He also advocated a whole raft of social reforms, many of which were later to be pursued by John Stuart Mill, one of Bentham’s pupils. Carr saw Bentham as one of the founders of modern liberal ‘utopianism’, which found its early twentieth-century expression in Wilsonianism in the US.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">William jennings Bryan (1860–1925)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">American politician and Woodrow Wilson’s Secretary of State who firmly believed in arbitration to prevent war. An avowed pacifist, he eventually resigned after Wilson’s second note to Germany in 1915 protesting about the sinking of the <span class="italic">Lusitania</span>.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">N. M. Butler (1862–1947)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">American educator, publicist and political figure who shared the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1931 and served as president of Columbia University from 1901 to 1945. Butler was a champion of international understanding, helping to establish the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, of which he was a trustee and later president (1925–45). In 1930 he declared that the next generation would ‘see a constantly increasing respect for Cobden’s principles of free trade and peace’, a view Carr strongly disparaged.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Edmund Burke (1729–97)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Best known for his critique of the revolution in France, <span class="italic">Reflections on the French Revolution</span>. Burke, despite his Whig sympathies and earlier support for the Americans in the War of Independence, has come to be seen as the principal exponent of Conservative philosophy.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Lord Cecil (1864–1958)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British statesman and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1937, one of the principal draftsmen of the League of Nations Covenant in 1919, and one of the most loyal workers for the League until its supersession by the United Nations in 1945. Carr attacked him in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, among other things, for his na tve faith in the League of Nations Covenant and belief in international conciliation.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Neville Chamberlain (1869–1940)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British Conservative prime minister (1937–1940) who was to be vilified by many for his policy of appeasement towards Nazi Germany. In particular he is remembered for the agreement he concluded with Hitler at Munich in 1938. He was harried by anti-appeasers on the Conservative benches. In September 1939 he was forced to declare war, but was ill-suited for the task ahead of him. A parliamentary revolt ensured his resignation in 1940. Six months later he died a broken man. Carr at the time was altogether more generous towards Chamberlain than later critics. Thus when Chamberlain became prime minister in May 1937, Carr wrote two years later in his <span class="italic">Britain: a Study of Foreign Policy from Versailles to the Outbreak of War</span> that Chamberlain was a ‘realist’ who ‘perceived more clearly than any other political leader the growing danger of a policy of words not matched by deeds’. In <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> Carr praised the Munich Agreement signed by Chamberlain and Hitler on 29 September 1938 as being ‘the nearest approach in recent years to the settlement of a major international issue by the procedure of peaceful change’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Winston Churchill (1874–1965)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Best known for guiding Britain to victory during the Second World War from 1940–45. However, Churchill had a tumultuous political career long before that. He served as a Liberal minister under Asquith and Lloyd George, and was First Lord of the Admiralty when the First World War broke out. He served in several different ministerial positions during the coalition governments, and went on to become Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1924–29. He was a backbencher throughout the 1930s, though he became an increasingly vociferous opponent of appeasement towards Nazi Germany. The outbreak of the Second World War led to his being returned to the Admiralty, to become prime minister in 1940. Strongly criticized by Carr during the war for having no programme for post-war economic reform, Churchill later attacked Carr and <span class="italic">The Times</span> (for which Carr worked during the Second World War) for being critical of British foreign policy in Greece. Carr in turn attacked Churchill’s famous ‘Iron Curtain’ speech made at Fulton, Missouri, in the March of 1946.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Richard Cobden (1804–65)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British politician known for his successful fight for the repeal of the Corn Laws and his defence of free trade. With John Bright, he believed that free trade would result in the reduction of armaments and the promotion of international peace. Theoretically he had influence on the post-First World War ‘utopians’ such as Nicholas Murray Butler whom Carr criticised in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Confucius (551–479 <span class="smallCap">BC</span>)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Chinese philosopher who emphasized the importance of moral values in all social and political order. He believed that the hierarchical structure oftraditional Chinese society was natural, though he argued that membership of the ruling class should be moral rather than hereditary.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Peter Drucker (1909-)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">American management consultant, educator and author whose later writings provided much of the philosophical and practical underpinning of the modern business corporation. In the 1930s, however, Drucker was far from the conservative he was later to become, and was admired by Carr for having written <span class="italic">The End of Economic Man</span>.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Anthony Eden (1897–1977)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Rapidly promoted through the Conservative ranks during the 1930s, he became foreign secretary in 1935. He resigned three years later in opposition to Chamberlain’s policy of appeasement. Eden was brought back into the Cabinet at the outbreak of war in 1939 as dominions secretary, and once again became foreign secretary after Chamberlain’s resignation in 1940. Eventually he became prime minister in 1955. Carr worked closely with Eden while he was still in the Foreign Office until his own resignation in early 1936.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Friedrich Engels (1820–95)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Mainly remembered as a life-long friend, collaborator and financial supporter of Karl Marx. Like Marx, Engels was critical of earlier Socialists such as Robert Owen, Saint-Simon and Fourier, and opposed them for their ‘utopianism’. Carr, it seems, borrowed the notion and transplanted it into his own critique of those early writers on international relations who in his view were ‘utopian’ too.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">T. H. Green (1836–82)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">English political philosopher who, according to Carr, ‘tempered the doctrines’ of Hegel with British nineteenth-century liberalism. Carr also quoted him as one of those who accepted that the morality of individuals can only be social morality – and social morality implies duty to fellow members of all other communities, including the larger international community. But, as Carr asked of Green in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, ‘In what sense can we find a basis for international morality by positing a society of states?’</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Hegel (1770–1831)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">German philosopher who developed a dialectical scheme that emphasized the progress of history and ideas from thesis to antithesis, and thence to a higher and richer synthesis. He was one of the great modern creators of a philosophical system that influenced the development of Marxism in particular. Carr had a high opinion of Hegel, whose work he had read in the early 1930s in preparation for his earlier books: <span class="italic">The Romantic Exiles</span> (1933), <span class="italic">Karl Marx</span> (1934) and <span class="italic">Michael Bakunin</span> (1937). Carr saw Hegel – along with Marx – as belonging to the ‘historical school’ of realists; that is, those who championed the view that no ethical standards are applicable to relations between states, an idea that certainly influenced him in writing <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Leonard Hobhouse (1864–1929)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Political philosopher and activist, a crucial figure in the emergence of ‘social liberalism’, which justified increased state intervention as necessary for the achievement of both social and individual goods, as well as social order. Hobhouse taught at the London School of Economics and had an influence on a number of Liberal reformers whom Carr criticized in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Cordell Hull (1871–1955)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">F. D. Roosevelt’s secretary of state from 1934–44. Famous in the 1930s for his efforts to maintain some form of open trading system, he was quoted as once saying ‘that when goods crossed frontiers, armies didn’t’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Immanuel Kant (1724–1804)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">German philosopher of the idealist school. In terms of international relations, he argued for a ‘league of nations’ to enforce the natural, derivable and international law, envisaging a decline in the power of individual states as that of the universal authority came to be established. Kantianism is identified in modern international relations as standing in opposition to state-centric realism.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Liberal British economist who first became famous for his <span class="italic">The Economic Consequences of the Peace</span> – a savage attack on the Versailles Peace Treaty of 1919 with which Carr fully agreed. Keynes went on in the 1930s to write his General Theory, which proposed state intervention to overcome large-scale unemployment.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Sir Hersch Lauterpacht (1870–1924)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British international lawyer of the Grotian school, criticized by Carr for his belief that the events of the 1930s were only a temporary regression of international order that would eventually be overcome.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Lenin (1870–1924)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Leader of the Bolshevik revolution for whom Carr came to have some regard – both as a state builder and a political theorist of revolution. Interestingly, Carr quotes Lenin over half a dozen times in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, often agreeing with what he has to say. He quotes Lenin on law. Lenin insists that law does not reflect any fixed ethical standard but is rather ‘the formulation, the registration of power relations, an expression of the will of the ruling class’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Maxim Litvinov (1876–1951)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Soviet diplomat and commissar of foreign affairs (1930–39) who was a prominent advocate of world disarmament and of collective security with the Western powers against Nazi Germany before the Second World War.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">David Lloyd George (1863–1945)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Born in Wales, Lloyd George became prime minister in the midst of war in 1916, and went on to lead Britain to victory. He subsequently headed the British delegation at the Paris Peace Conference, and continued as prime minster until 1922 when the Conservatives withdrew from the governing coalition.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">John Locke (1632–1704)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">English philosopher widely regarded as one of the fathers of the Enlightenment and as a key figure in the development of liberalism. Locke was mainly concerned with the proper extent of freedom and religious toleration. He believed that the political authority’s fundamental role was to protect property. Locke defended the concept of private property on the grounds that it was legitimated when it was mixed with the individual’s labour.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Niccoló Machiavelli (1469–1527)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Florentine political adviser and historian. In his best known works <span class="italic">The Prince</span> and the <span class="italic">Discourses</span>, he outlined a theory of <span class="italic">raison d’ètat</span> where he seemed to be suggesting that the use of any technique was permissible as long as it achieved the desired end. The term ‘Machiavellian’ later entered the world’s language to designate cynicism, manipulation and duplicity. Carr was much influenced by Machiavelli and indeed used him as the basis for constructing his own realist critique of what he termed ‘utopianism’. Carr described him as ‘the first important political realist’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Karl Mannheim (1893–1947)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Hungarian sociologist who made an important contribution to the sociology of knowledge. Like Marx, Mannheim wanted to relate belief systems that emerged in political historical periods to the socio-economic and political conditions that seemed to stimulate and sustain them. Unlike Marx, though, Mannheim believed utopianism to be a forward-looking and visionary tendency that was capable of breaking out of the constraints of the existing social order and could thus point to the possibility of real change in the historical process. The influence of Mannheim’s <span class="italic">Ideology and Utopia</span> on Carr was immense. Not only did Carr want to call his own book <span class="italic">Utopia and Reality</span> rather than <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> (this was his publisher’s suggestion), he also used Mannheim’s central theoretical claim about the relativity of knowledge as the basis of his own thinking about ideas.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Charles Manning</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Montagu Burton Professor of International Relations at the London School of Economics between 1930 and 1962 – and a friend of Carr’s with whom Carr worked quite closely in the 1930s when developing his own views on peaceful change. Manning read drafts of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, though he was by no means in agreement with all of its central claims. Carr in turn did not share Manning’s views about the existence of a larger ‘international society of states’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Alfred Marshall (1842–1924)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British economist, one of the chief founders of the school of English neoclassical economics. Marshall is often considered to have been in the line of descent of the great British economists – Adam Smith, David Ricardo and J. S. Mill.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Karl Marx (1818–83)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">German philosopher, sociologist, socialist and economist. His influence right across the social sciences has been immense. Fundamentally, Marx was a historical materialist, believing that history could be studied as a scientific process. Marx argued that societies would progress through several stages of socio-economic development. Capitalism was the highest stage, though Marx believed that it contained its own contradictions that would lead it to implode, to be replaced by socialism. Carr was not a Marxist and disagreed with both Marx’s labour theory of value and his idea of the proletariat as a revolutionary class. Nonetheless, Carr borrowed heavily from Marx’s historical sociology and from his various insights about the failure of capitalism as a system in the inter-war period. Two years before his death, in 1980, Carr confessed that <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> ‘was not exactly a Marxist work’, but was ‘strongly impregnated with Marxist ways of thinking applied to international affairs’. Carr often contrasted Marx the ‘realist’ with the anarchist Bakunin as ‘utopian’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">James Mill (1773–1836)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Liberal thinker, mainly remembered now for the education of his son, John Stuart Mill, and his life-long friendship with Jeremy Bentham.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">John Stuart Mill (1806–73)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Liberal philosopher and political activist, strongly influenced by the work of Bentham. However, Mill was to differ from Bentham in his belief in individual personal character and self-regarding personal conduct. Mill was also the leading Liberal feminist of his day.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Reinhold Niebuhr (1892–1971)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">American theologian and political scientist, who in the 1930s at least employed critical Marxist categories to understand the modern world. Carr always remained a warm admirer of Niebuhr and was strongly influenced by his 1932 study <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society. The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> is littered with various hard-hitting quotes from Niebuhr about the hypocrisies of the privileged and the exercise of power. Later Niebuhr moved away from his earlier attachment to Marxism but he continued to have a huge influence in the US in the post-war period.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Robert Owen (1771–1858)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British social reformer whose ideas contributed to the development of nineteenth-century socialism. Owen was essentially a communitarian Socialist who believed that the amelioration of social conditions and intelligent organization of the labour process were the necessary means for the creation of greater equality and justice. Like Engels, Carr regarded him as a utopian Socialist whose contribution to nineteenth-century thought was not his realistic analysis of society but his desire and aspiration to change reality.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Plato (427–347 <span class="smallCap">BC</span>)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Greek philosopher whose most important treatise, the <span class="italic">Republic</span>, espoused Plato’s view of the ideal society. Carr saw him as an early example of a type of utopian who proposed what he called in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> ‘highly imaginative solutions whose relation to existing facts was one of flat negation’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Jean-jacques Rousseau (1712–78)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Moral, political and educational philosopher whose political ideas are exemplified in his <span class="italic">Social Contract</span>. His main concern was liberty, and he believed that it could be attained through ‘general will’. This is the will of each individual in favour of the good of the whole community, and is superior to his own particular interests.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Sir john Simon (1873–1954)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Liberal politician who served as foreign secretary from 1931–35. He was Chancellor of the Exchequer in Neville Chamberlain’s government from 1937–40, and closely identified with the policy of appeasement towards Nazi Germany.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Saint-Simon (1760–1825)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">French social theorist and one of the chief founders of Christian socialism. In his major work, <span class="italic">Nouveau Christianisme</span> (1825), he proclaimed a brotherhood of man that must accompany the scientific organization of industry and society. Carr regarded Saint-Simon as another important example of a utopian socialist who aspired to change everything without first having provided a realistic analysis of the world.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Adam Smith (1723–90)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Scottish philosopher and founder of classical economics. In his work, Smith argued in his famous <span class="italic">The Wealth of Nations</span> that the individual’s pursuit of private gain would, unintentionally through the ‘invisible hand’, benefit the whole of society. He also described the importance of the division of labour. Carr viewed Smith’s particular brand of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> economics as being responsible for popularizing the doctrine of the ‘harmony of interests’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Jan Smuts (1870–1950)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Smuts fought against the British during the Boer War but subsequently became a firm supporter of the Union of South Africa that was established in 1910. He resisted calls for neutrality during the First World War and served in the British army. In 1917 he became a member of the British War Cabinet. Following the war he became prime minister until 1924, and was active in South African politics throughout the inter-war period, becoming prime minister again at the outbreak of the Second World War.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Sophocles (496–406 <span class="smallCap">BC</span>)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">One of the three great tragic playwrights of classical Greece, ranking with Aeschylus and Euripides. He wrote some 123 dramas, only 7 of which have survived.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Stoics</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The Stoics taught that material possessions were of no importance whatsoever for a man’s happiness. The basis of human happiness, they believed, was to live ‘in agreement’ with oneself, a statement that was later replaced by the formula ‘to live in agreement with nature’. The only real good for man is the possession of virtue; everything else (wealth or poverty, health or illness, life or death) is of little consequence.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">William Taft (1857–1930)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Republican president of the US from 1909–13, Taft encouraged ‘dollar diplomacy’ abroad, relying on trade rather than military power to spread influence. However, he is mainly remembered for splitting the Republican Party when his former friend and predecessor, Teddy Roosevelt, decided to run against him in 1912 as a Progressive, splitting the Republican vote and allowing Woodrow Wilson to come to office.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Arnold Toynbee (1889–1975)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">British historian, best known for his study of the rise and fall of civilizations over the course of history. He concluded that civilisations rose by responding successfully to challenges under the leadership of creative minorities composed of elite leaders. Civilizations declined when their leaders stopped responding creatively, and the civilizations declined and died. In the 1930s he exercised great influence through Chatham House – where he was director of studies from 1924–54 – and through its annual <span class="italic">Survey of International Affairs</span>, which he wrote single-handedly. A liberal internationalist and opponent of appeasement, Carr attacked him frequently in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Toynbee later argued that ‘Carr is the consummate debunker who was debunked by the war itself’.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Woodrow Wilson (1856–1924)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Democratic president of the US from 1913–21. Mainly remembered for taking his country into the First World War in 1917. Wilson enunciated ‘Fourteen Points’ for achieving peace and led the American delegation at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, at which he attempted to realize his vision of a new international order. While failing to achieve everything he wanted, his main objective of establishing a League of Nations did come into being, though the Senate vetoed the possibility of American participation in the organization. Carr was a major critic of Wilson on two counts: first he opposed what he saw as Wilson’s indiscriminate use of the slogan of the right of self-determination, which he regarded as economically problematic and politically destabilizing in the inter-war period; second, he saw Wilson as the quintessential moralist in politics who used fine-sounding slogans as a means of advancing American power in the world. On one level <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> can be read as an extended attack on Wilson and Wilsonianism – this in spite of the fact that Carr held the Woodrow Wilson Chair in International Politics at Aberystwyth from 1936–47.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">Sir Alfred Zimmern (1879–1957)</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">First holder of the Woodrow Wilson Chair at the University of Wales, Aberystwyth, in 1919. Zimmern was a classicist who wrote several books in the inter-war period on international affairs, his best known being <span class="italic">The League of Nations and the Rule of Law</span> (1936). Carr and Zimmern stood at opposite ends of the theoretical and political spectrum. Carr was a radical, increasingly critical of the League of Nations, who attacked the Liberal Zimmern in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> for failing to grasp the deeper cause of the inter-war crisis. Zimmern was a ‘cautious idealist’, who saw Carr as ‘a thorough-going relativist with no moral compass to guide him’.</p>

<br class="end-page"/></div>