<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterTitle1">Chronology</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<colgroup>
<col width="15%"/>
<col width="5%"/>
<col width="80%"/>
</colgroup>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">1919</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 8</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Opening of the Paris Peace Conference under the Chairmanship of Georges Clemenceau.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">June 28</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">German representatives sign the Peace Treaty in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 19</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">US Senate votes against ratification of the Treaty of Versailles, thereby leaving the US outside the League of Nations.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1920</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 10</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Ratification of the Treaty of Versailles brings the League of Nations into existence, with 29 initial members (out of 32 Allied signatures to the Versailles Treaty).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">US Senate votes against joining the League of Nations.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Feb. 26</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">In accordance with the Treaty of Versailles, the League of Nations takes over the Saar area between France and Germany; France takes control of the Saar’s coal deposits.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 19</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">US Senate rejects the Versailles Treaty.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">April 6–May 17</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">While German troops are suppressing a rebellion in the Ruhr (a demilitarized area), French troops occupy Frankfurt, Darmstadt, and Hanau until German forces have withdrawn.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">April 25</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Supreme Allied Council disposes territories formerly in the Ottoman Empire: it assigns mandates over Mesopotamia and Palestine to Britain, and over Syria and the Lebanon to France.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 15</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Danzig (modern Gdansk) is proclaimed a free city.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1921</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 6</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">End of Russian civil war, with victory to the Bolsheviks.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 24–29</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Paris Conference fixes Germany’s reparation payments.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 8</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">French troops occupy Du sseldorf and other towns in the Ruhr because of Germany’s failure to make preliminary reparations payment.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">April 27</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Reparations Commission fixes Germany’s liability at 132,000 million gold Marks.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">May 6</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Peace treaty signed between Germany and Russia.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 30</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">French troops evacuate the Ruhr.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 12-Feb. 6 1922</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Washington conference on disarmament.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Dec. 29</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">US, British Empire, France, Italy and Japan sign Washington Treaty to limit naval armaments.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1922</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">April 16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Rapallo Treaty between Germany and Russia: Germany recognizes Russia as ‘a great power’ and both sides waive reparations claims; the Treaty leads to the resumption of diplomatic and trade relations, and to co-operation between the two countries’ armies.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Oct. 28</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">In Italy, Fascists march on Rome, leading to Mussolini forming a government composed of Liberals and Nationalists, as well as Fascists, at the King’s invitation on 31 October.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1923</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 11</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">As a result of Germany’s failure to meet reparations payments, French and Belgian troops occupy the Ruhr; Germans respond with passive resistance and sabotage; the occupiers make arrests and deportations, and cut off the Rhineland from the rest of Germany.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 8–9</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">The ‘Munich Putsch’: Adolf Hitler and the National Socialists attempt a <span class="italic">coup d’état</span> in Munich.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1924</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 21</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Death of Soviet leader Lenin. Stalin takes over.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">July 16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">At London conference on reparations, the Dawes Plan, which removes reparations from the sphere of political controversy, is approved.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Aug. 16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">French delegates at London conference agree to evacuate the Ruhr within a year.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1925</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Oct. 5–16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Locarno Conference discusses the question of a security pact and strikes a balance between French and German interests by drafting treaties (a) guaranteeing the French-German and Belgian-German frontiers; (b) between Germany and France, Belgium, Czechoslovakia and Poland respectively; (c) regarding a mutual guarantee between France, Czechoslovakia and Poland. Britain is involved in the guarantee of Franco-Belgian-German frontiers but not in the arrangements in Eastern Europe.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Dec. 1</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Locarno treaties signed in London.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1926</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 8</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Germany is admitted into the League of Nations.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">1927</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Stalin consolidates his power in Soviet Russia, and in China the first revolution is crushed.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent"><span class="bold">1928</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">The Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawing war and providing for pacific settlement of disputes is signed in Paris by 65 states, including the US and the USSR.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1929</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">June 7</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Young Committee reviewing German reparations payments recommends that Germany should pay annuities, secured on mortgage of German railways, to an international bank until 1988.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Aug. 6–13</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">At a Reparations Conference at the Hague, Germany accepts the Young Plan; Allies agree to evacuate the Rhineland by June 1930.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Oct. 24–29</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Crashes in share values on Wall Street stock market, New York, starting with ‘Black Thursday’ and continuing (after closure of the market from noon on 24 October until 28 October) on ‘Black Monday’ (28 October) and ‘Black Tuesday’ (29 October). Leads to the cessation of American loans to Europe.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1931</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 18</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Japanese invasion of Manchuria.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1933</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 30</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Adolf Hitler is appointed Chancellor of Germany; his cabinet includes only two Nazis, Herman Goering (Minister without Portfolio) and Wilhelm Frick (Minister of the Interior). Franz von Papen is Vice-chancellor, Constantin von Neurath foreign minister.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 4</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Inauguration of F. D. Roosevelt; Cordell Hull is appointed Secretary of State.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 27</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Japan announces that it will leave the League of Nations (effective from 1935).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Oct. 14</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Germany withdraws from the League of Nations and its Disarmament Conference.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1934</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">July 25</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Engelbert Dollfuss, Chancellor of Austria, is murdered in an attempted Nazi <span class="italic">coup d’état</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 18</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">USSR is admitted into the League of Nations.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1935</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 13</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Plebiscite in the Saarland: 90.8 per cent of voters favour incorporation into Germany.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Germany repudiates disarmament clauses of the Versailles Treaty and introduces conscription.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">May 2</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">France-USSR treaty of mutual assistance for five years.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">May 16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">USSR-Czechoslovakia pact of mutual assistance.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">July 25–Aug. 20</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Meeting of the Third International (Soviet-controlled international Communist organization) declares that Communists in democratic countries should support their governments against Fascist states.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Oct. 2</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Italy invades Ethiopia.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Oct. 7</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Following Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia, the League of Nations Council declares and denounces Italy as the aggressor.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Oct. 19</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">League of Nations imposes sanctions against Italy.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1936</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Jan. 6-March 25</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Resumption of London Naval Conference: Japan withdraws on 15 January because other countries refuse to accept its demand for a common upper limit on naval strength.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 7</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">German troops occupy the demilitarized zone of the Rhineland, thereby violating the Treaty of Versailles.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">July 17</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Army mutiny in Spanish Morocco, led by Franco, to uphold religion and traditional values; other mutinies occur throughout Spain, thereby starting the Spanish Civil War.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 1</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Following the visit of Italian Foreign Minister Ciano to Berlin, Italian Prime Minister Benito Mussolini proclaims the Rome-Berlin Axis.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 25</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Germany and Japan sign Anti-Comintern Pact; the countries agree to work together against international communism; Germany also recognizes Japan’s regime in Manchuria.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1937</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">May 28</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">On Stanley Baldwin’s retirement, Neville Chamberlain forms a National Government, with Sir John Simon as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Anthony Eden as Foreign Secretary.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">July 7</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">In China, incident at Marco Polo Bridge, southeast of Beijing, is followed by Japanese invasion of northeast China.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">July 17</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Naval agreements between Britain and Germany, and Britain and the USSR.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 6</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Italy joins German-Japanese Anti-Comintern Pact.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nov. 17–21</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">British cabinet minister Lord Halifax meets Adolf Hitler to attempt peaceful settlement of the Sudeten problem.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Dec. 11</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Italy withdraws from the League of Nations.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1938</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Feb. 20</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden resigns in protest at Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain’s priorities in foreign affairs. Chamberlain had declined President Roosevelt’s suggestion of a conference on international relations and was determined to obtain an agreement with Italy; Eden is succeeded on 25 February by Lord Halifax.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Feb. 21</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Winston Churchill leads an outcry in the House of Commons against Chamberlain and the following day 25 members of the administration vote against the government in a censure motion.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 12</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">German troops enter Austria, which the next day is declared part of the German Reich.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 15</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain visits Adolf Hitler at Berchtesgaden; Hitler states his determination to annex the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia on the principle of self-determination.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 29–30</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">The Munich Conference, when Chamberlain, French Prime Minister E– douard Daladier, Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini agree to Germany’s military occupation of the Sudetenland, while the remaining frontiers of Czechoslovakia are guaranteed; Germany becomes the dominant power in Europe and both the Little Entente and the French system of alliances in Eastern Europe are shattered; on his return to London, Chamberlain declares that he has bought ‘peace with honour. I believe it is peace in our time’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent1"><span class="bold">1939</span></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 15</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">German troops occupy Bohemia and Moravia in Czechoslovakia; Hitler makes a triumphal entry into Prague in the evening; the region becomes a protectorate ruled by Constantin von Neurath.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 16</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Slovakia is placed under German ‘protection’, while Hungary annexes Ruthenia (formerly part of Czechoslovakia).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 21</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Germany demands of Poland that Germany should acquire the Free City of Danzig and routes through the ‘Polish corridor’ (which provides Poland with access to the Baltic); Poland rejects the demands.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 28</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">In the Spanish Civil War, Madrid surrenders to nationalists; remaining republican areas surrender the next day, ending the war.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 28</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Adolf Hitler denounces the non-aggression pact with Poland (of January 1934).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">March 31</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Britain and France pledge to support Poland in any attack on Polish independence (pact of mutual assistance agreed on 6 April).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">April 18</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">USSR proposes triple alliance with Britain and France.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">April 28</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Hitler denounces 1935 British-German naval agreement and repeats demands on Poland.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">May 22</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Hitler and Mussolini sign ten-year military alliance (the ‘Pact of Steel’).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Aug. 23</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Nazi-Soviet Pact; the parties agree not to fight each other; secret protocols provide for the partition of Poland and for the USSR to operate freely in the Baltic States, Finland, and Bessarabia.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Aug. 25</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">British-Polish treaty of mutual assistance signed in London.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 1</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Germany invades Poland and annexes Danzig; Italy declares neutrality.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">Sept. 3</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Britain and France declare war on Germany, following Germany’s failure to reply to ultimata on Poland; Australia and New Zealand also declare war.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>