<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_42"></a>CHAPTER FOUR</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">The Harmony of Interests</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head1">The utopian synthesis</p>
<p class="NoIndent">No political society, national or international, can exist unless people submit to certain rules of conduct. The problem why people should submit to such rules is the fundamental problem of political philosophy. The problem presents itself just as insistently in a democracy as under other forms of government and in international as in national politics; for such a formula as ‘the greatest good of the greatest number’ provides no answer to the question why the minority, whose greatest good is <span class="italic">ex hypothesi</span> not pursued, should submit to rules made in the interest of the greatest number. Broadly speaking, the answers given to the question fall into two categories, corresponding to the antithesis, discussed in a previous chapter, between those who regard politics as a function of ethics and those who regard ethics as a function of politics.</p>
<p class="para">Those who assert the primacy of ethics over politics will hold that it is the duty of the individual to submit for the sake of the community as a whole, sacrificing his own interest to the interest of others who are more numerous, or in some other way more deserving. The ‘good’ which consists in self-interest should be subordinated to the ‘good’ which consists in loyalty and self-sacrifice for an end higher than self-interest. The obligation rests on some kind of intuition of what is right and cannot be demonstrated by rational argument. Those, on the other hand, who assert the primacy of politics over ethics, will argue that the ruler rules because he is the stronger, and the ruled submit because they are the weaker. This principle is just as easily applicable to democracy as to any other form of government. The majority rules because it is stronger, the minority submits because it is weaker. Democracy, it has often been said, substitutes the counting of heads for the breaking of heads. But the substitution is merely a convenience, and the principle of the two methods is the same. The realist, therefore, unlike the intuitionist, has a perfectly rational answer to the question why the individual should submit. He should submit because otherwise the stronger will compel him; and the results of compulsion are more disagreeable than those of <a id="page_43"></a>voluntary submission. Obligation is thus derived from a sort of spurious ethic based on the reasonableness of recognizing that might is right.</p>
<p class="para">Both these answers are open to objection. Modern man, who has witnessed so many magnificent achievements of human reason, is reluctant to believe that reason and obligation sometimes conflict. On the other hand, men of all ages have failed to find satisfaction in the view that the rational basis of obligation is merely the right of the stronger. One of the strongest points of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century utopianism was its apparent success in meeting both these objections at once. The utopian, starting from the primacy of ethics, necessarily believes in an obligation which is ethical in character and independent of the right of the stronger. But he has also been able to convince himself, on grounds other than those of the realist, that the duty of the individual to submit to rules made in the interest of the community can be justified in terms of reason, and that the greatest good of the greatest number is a rational end even for those who are not included in the greatest number. He achieves this synthesis by maintaining that the highest interest of the individual and the highest interest of the community naturally coincide. In pursuing his own interest, the individual pursues that of the community, and in promoting the interest of the community he promotes his own. This is the famous doctrine of the harmony of interests. It is a necessary corollary of the postulate that moral laws can be established by right reasoning. The admission of any ultimate divergence of interests would be fatal to this postulate; and any apparent clash of interests must therefore be explained as the result of wrong calculation. Burke tacitly accepted the doctrine of identity when he defined expediency as ‘that which is good for the community and for every individual in it’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn1" id="ch04_fn1">1</a> It was handed on from the eighteenth-century rationalists to Bentham, and from Bentham to the Victorian moralists. The utilitarian philosophers could justify morality by the argument that, in promoting the good of others, one automatically promotes one’s own. Honesty is the best policy. If people or nations behave badly, it must be, as Buckle and Sir Norman Angell and Professor Zimmern think, because they are unintellectual and short-sighted and muddle-headed.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head2">The paradise of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">It was the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> school of political economy created by Adam Smith which was in the main responsible for popularizing the doctrine of the harmony of interests. The purpose of the school was to promote the removal of state control in economic matters; and in order to justify this policy, it set out to demonstrate that the individual could be relied on, without external control, to promote the interests of the community for <a id="page_44"></a>the very reason that those interests were identical with his own. This proof was the burden of <span class="italic">The Wealth of Nations</span>. The community is divided into those who live by rent, those who live by wages and those who live by profit; and the interests of ‘those three great orders’ are ‘strictly and inseparably connected with the general interest of the society’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn2" id="ch04_fn2">2</a> The harmony is none the less real if those concerned are unconscious of it. The individual ‘neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it . . . He intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn3" id="ch04_fn3">3</a> The invisible hand, which Adam Smith would perhaps have regarded as a metaphor, presented no difficulty to Victorian piety. ‘It is curious to observe’, remarks a tract issued by the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge towards the middle of the nineteenth century, ‘how, through the wise and beneficent arrangement of Providence, men thus do the greatest service to the public when they are thinking of nothing but their own gain.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn4" id="ch04_fn4">4</a> About the same time an English clergyman wrote a work entitled <span class="italic">The Temporal Benefits of Christianity Explained</span>. The harmony of interests provided a solid rational basis for morality. To love one’s neighbour turned out to be a thoroughly enlightened way of loving oneself. ‘We now know’, wrote Mr Henry Ford as recently as 1930, ‘that anything which is economically right is also morally right. There can be no conflict between good economics and good morals.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn5" id="ch04_fn5">5</a></p>
<p class="para">The assumption of a general and fundamental harmony of interests is <span class="italic">prima facie</span> so paradoxical that it requires careful scrutiny. In the form which Adam Smith gave to it, it had a definite application to the economic structure of the eighteenth century. It presupposed a society of small producers and merchants, interested in the maximization of production and exchange, infinitely mobile and adaptable, and unconcerned with the problem of the distribution of wealth. Those conditions were substantially fulfilled in an age when production involved no high degree of specialization and no sinking of capital in fixed equipment, and when the class which might be more interested in the equitable distribution of wealth than in its maximum production was insignificant and without influence. But by a curious coincidence, the year which saw the publication of <span class="italic">The Wealth of Nations</span> was also the year in which Watt invented his steam engine. Thus, at the very moment when <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> theory was receiving its classical exposition, its premises were undermined by an invention which was destined to call into being immobile, highly specialized, mammoth industries and a large and powerful proletariat more interested in distribution than in production. Once industrial capitalism and the class system had become the recognized structure of society, the doctrine of the harmony of interests acquired a <a id="page_45"></a>new significance, and became, as we shall presently see, the ideology of a dominant group concerned to maintain its predominance by asserting the identity of its interests with those of the community as a whole.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn6" id="ch04_fn6">6</a></p>
<p class="para">But this transformation could not have been effected, and the doctrine could not have survived at all, but for one circumstance. The survival of the belief in a harmony of interests was rendered possible by the unparalleled expansion of production, population and prosperity, which marked the hundred years following the publication of <span class="italic">The Wealth of Nations</span> and the invention of the steam engine. Expanding prosperity contributed to the popularity of the doctrine in three different ways. It attenuated competition for markets among producers, since fresh markets were constantly available; it postponed the class issue, with its insistence on the primary importance of equitable distribution, by extending to members of the less prosperous classes some share in the general prosperity; and by creating a sense of confidence in present and future well-being, it encouraged men to believe that the world was ordered on so rational a plan as the natural harmony of interests. ‘It was the continual widening of the field of demand which, for half a century, made capitalism operate as if it were a liberal utopia.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn7" id="ch04_fn7">7</a> The tacit presupposition of infinitely expanding markets was the foundation on which the supposed harmony of interests rested. As Dr Mannheim points out, traffic control is unnecessary so long as the number of cars does not exceed the comfortable capacity of the road.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn8" id="ch04_fn8">8</a> Until that moment arrives, it is easy to believe in a natural harmony of interests between road-users.</p>
<p class="para">What was true of individuals was assumed to be also true of nations. Just as individuals, by pursuing their own good, unconsciously compass the good of the whole community, so nations in serving themselves serve humanity. Universal free trade was justified on the ground that the maximum economic interest of each nation was identified with the maximum economic interest of the whole world. Adam Smith, who was a practical reformer rather than a pure theorist, did indeed admit that governments might have to protect certain industries in the interests of national defence. But such derogations seemed to him and to his followers trivial exceptions to the rule. ‘<span class="italic">Laissez-faire</span>’, as J. S. Mill puts it, ‘. . . should be the general rule: every departure from it, unless required by some great good, a certain evil.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn9" id="ch04_fn9">9</a> Other thinkers gave the doctrine of the harmony of national interests a still wider application. ‘The true interests of a nation’, observes a late eighteenth-century writer, ‘never yet stood in opposition to the general interest of mankind; and it can never happen that philanthropy and patriotism can impose on any man inconsistent duties.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn10" id="ch04_fn10">10</a> T. H. Green, the English Hegelian who tempered the doctrines of his master with concessions to British nineteenth-century liberalism, <a id="page_46"></a>held that ‘no action in its own interest of a state which fulfilled its idea could conflict with any true interest or right of general society’,<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn11" id="ch04_fn11">11</a> though it is interesting to note that the question-begging epithet ‘true’, which in the eighteenth-century quotation is attached to the interests of the nation, has been transferred by the nineteenth century to the interest of the general society. Mazzini, who embodied the liberal nineteenth-century philosophy of nationalism, believed in a sort of division of labour between nations. Each nation had its own special task for which its special aptitudes fitted it, and the performance of this task was its contribution to the welfare of humanity. If all nations acted in this spirit, international harmony would prevail. The same condition of apparently infinite expansibility which encouraged belief in the economic harmony of interests made possible the belief in the political harmony of rival national movements. One reason why contemporaries of Mazzini thought nationalism a good thing was that there were few recognized nations, and plenty of room for them. In an age when Germans, Czechs, Poles, Ukrainians, Magyars and half a dozen more national groups were not yet visibly jostling one another over an area of a few hundred square miles, it was comparatively easy to believe that each nation, by developing its own nationalism, could make its own special contribution to the international harmony of interests. Most liberal writers continued to believe, right down to 1918, that nations, by developing their own nationalism, promoted the cause of internationalism; and Wilson and many other makers of the peace treaties saw in national self-determination the key to world peace. More recently still, responsible Anglo-Saxon statesmen have been from time to time content to echo, probably without much reflexion, the old Mazzinian formulae.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn12" id="ch04_fn12">12</a></p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head3">Darwinism in politics</p>
<p class="NoIndent">When the centenary of <span class="italic">The Wealth of Nations</span> was celebrated in 1876, there were already symptoms of an impending breakdown. No country but Great Britain had been commercially powerful enough to believe in the international harmony of economic interests. Acceptance of free-trade principles outside Great Britain had always been partial, half-hearted and short-lived. The United States had rejected them from the start. About 1840, Friedrich List, who had spent much time studying industrial development in the United States, began to preach to a German audience the doctrine that, while free trade was the right policy for an industrially dominant nation like Great Britain, only protection could enable weaker nations to break the British stranglehold. German and American industries, <a id="page_47"></a>built up behind protective tariffs, were soon seriously impinging on the worldwide British industrial monopoly. The British Dominions overseas made use of their newly-won fiscal autonomy to protect themselves against the manufactures of the mother country. The pressure of competition was increasing on all sides. Nationalism began to wear a sinister aspect, and to degenerate into imperialism. The philosophy of Hegel, who identified reality with an eternally recurring conflict of ideas, extended its influence. Behind Hegel stood Marx, who materialized the Hegelian conflict into a class-war of economic interest-groups, and working-class parties came into being which steadfastly refused to believe in the harmony of interests between capital and labour. Above all, Darwin propounded and popularized a biological doctrine of evolution through a perpetual struggle for life and the elimination of the unfit.</p>
<p class="para">It was the doctrine of evolution which for a time enabled the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> philosophy to make its terms with the new conditions and the new trend of thought. Free competition had always been worshipped as the beneficent deity of the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> system. The French economist Bastiat, in a work significantly entitled <span class="italic">Les Harmonies Économiques</span>, had hailed competition as ‘that humanitarian force . . . which continually wrests progress from the hands of the individual to make it the common heritage of the great human family’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn13" id="ch04_fn13">13</a> Under the growing strains of the latter half of the nineteenth century, it was perceived that competition in the economic sphere implied exactly what Darwin proclaimed as the biological law of nature – the survival of the stronger at the expense of the weaker. The small producer or trader was gradually being put out of business by his large-scale competitor; and this development was what progress and the welfare of the community as a whole demanded. <span class="italic">Laissez-faire</span> meant an open field, and the prize to the strongest. The doctrine of the harmony of interests underwent an almost imperceptible modification. The good of the community (or, as people were now inclined to say, of the species) was still identical with the good of its individual members, but only of those individuals who were effective competitors in the struggle for life. Humanity went on from strength to strength, shedding its weaklings by the way. ‘The development of the species,’ as Marx said, ‘. . . and therefore the higher development of the individual, can only be secured through the historical process, in which individuals are sacrificed.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn14" id="ch04_fn14">14</a> Such was the doctrine of the new age of intensified economic competition preached by the school of Herbert Spencer, and commonly accepted in Great Britain in the seventies and eighties. The last French disciple of Adam Smith, Yves Guyot, assisted perhaps by the accident that the French word concurrence means ‘collaboration’ as well as ‘competition’, wrote a work entitled <span class="italic">La Morale de la Concurrence</span>. Among English <a id="page_48"></a>writers who applied this evolutionary principle to international politics, the most popular was Bagehot:</p>
<p class="extract">Conquest is the premium given by nature to those national characters which their national customs have made most fit to win in war, and in most material respects those winning characters are really the best characters. The characters which do win in war are the characters which we should wish to win in war.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn15" id="ch04_fn15">15</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">About the same time, a Russian sociologist defined international politics as ‘the art of conducting the struggle for existence between social organisms’;<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn16" id="ch04_fn16">16</a> and in 1900 a distinguished professor, in a once famous book, stated the doctrine in all its naked ruthlessness:</p>
<p class="extract">The path of progress is strewn with the wreck of nations; traces are everywhere to be seen of the hecatombs of inferior races, and of victims who found not the narrow way to the greater perfection. Yet these dead peoples are, in very truth, the stepping stones on which mankind has arisen to the higher intellectual and deeper emotional life of to-day.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn17" id="ch04_fn17">17</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">In Germany, the same view was propounded by Treitschke and Houston Stewart Chamberlain. The doctrine of progress through the elimination of unfit nations seemed a fair corollary of the doctrine of progress through the elimination of unfit individuals; and some such belief, though not always openly avowed, was implicit in late nineteenth-century imperialism. In the later nineteenth century, as an American historian remarks, ‘the basic problem of international relations was who should cut up the victims’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn18" id="ch04_fn18">18</a> The harmony of interests was established through the sacrifice of ‘unfit’ Africans and Asiatics.</p>
<p class="para">One point had, unfortunately, been overlooked. For more than a hundred years, the doctrine of the harmony of interests had provided a rational basis for morality. The individual had been urged to serve the interest of the community on the plea that that interest was also his own. The ground had now been shifted. In the long run, the good of the community and the good of the individual were still the same. But this eventual harmony was preceded by a struggle for life between individuals, in which not only the good, but the very existence, of the loser were eliminated altogether from the picture. Morality in these conditions had no rational attraction for prospective losers; and the whole ethical system was built on the sacrifice of the weaker brother. In practice, nearly every state had made inroads on the classical doctrine, and introduced social legislation to protect the economically weak against the economically <a id="page_49"></a>strong. The doctrine itself died harder. In the seventies Dostoevsky, who had none of the prejudices of an Englishman or an economist, made Ivan Karamazov declare that the price of admission to the ‘eternal harmony’ was too high if it included the sufferings of the innocent. About the same time, Winwood Reade made an uncomfortable sensation in Great Britain with a book called <span class="italic">The Martyrdom of Man</span>, which drew attention to the immense tale of suffering and waste involved in the theory of evolution. In the nineties, Huxley confessed, in the name of science, to the existence of a discrepancy between the ‘cosmic process’ and the ‘ethical process’;<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn19" id="ch04_fn19">19</a> and Balfour, approaching the problem from the angle of philosophy, concluded that ‘a complete harmony between “egoism” and “altruism”, between the pursuit of the highest happiness for oneself and the highest happiness for other people, can never be provided by a creed which refuses to admit that the deeds done and the character formed in this life can flow over into another, and there permit a reconciliation and an adjustment between the conflicting principles which are not always possible here’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn20" id="ch04_fn20">20</a> Less and less was heard of the beneficent properties of free competition. Before 1914, though the policy of international free trade was still upheld by the British electorate and by British economists, the ethical postulate which had once formed the basis of the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> philosophy no longer appealed, at any rate in its crude form, to any serious thinker. Biologically and economically, the doctrine of the harmony of interests was tenable only if you left out of account the interest of the weak who must be driven to the wall, or called in the next world to redress the balance of the present.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head4">The international harmony</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Attention has been drawn to the curious way in which doctrines, already obsolete or obsolescent before the war of 1914, were reintroduced in the post-war period, largely through American inspiration, into the special field of international affairs. This would appear to be conspicuously true of the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> doctrine of the harmony of interests. In the United States, the history of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> presents special features. Throughout the nineteenth, and well into the twentieth, centuries the United States, while requiring tariff protection against European competition, had enjoyed the advantage of an expanding domestic market of apparently unlimited potentialities. In Great Britain, which continued down to 1914 to dominate world trade, but was increasingly conscious of strains and stresses at home, J. S. Mill and later economists clung firmly to international free trade, but made more and more inroads into <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> orthodoxy in the domestic sphere. In the United States, Carey and his successors justified protective tariffs, but in <a id="page_50"></a>every other respect maintained the immutable principles of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span>. In Europe after 1919, planned economy, which rests on the assumption that no natural harmony of interests exists and that interests must be artificially harmonized by state action, became the practice, if not the theory, of almost every state. In the United States, the persistence of an expanding domestic market staved off this development till after 1929. The natural harmony of interests remained an integral part of the American view of life; and in this, as in other respects, current theories of international politics were deeply imbued with the American tradition. Moreover, there was a special reason for the ready acceptance of the doctrine in the international sphere. In domestic affairs it is clearly the business of the state to create harmony if no natural harmony exists. In international politics, there is no organized power charged with the task of creating harmony; and the temptation to assume a natural harmony is therefore particularly strong. But this is no excuse for burking the issue. To make the harmonization of interests the goal of political action is not the same thing as to postulate that a natural harmony of interests exists;<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn21" id="ch04_fn21">21</a> and it is this latter postulate which has caused so much confusion in international thinking.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head5">The common interest in peace</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Politically, the doctrine of the identity of interests has commonly taken the form of an assumption that every nation has an identical interest in peace, and that any nation which desires to disturb the peace is therefore both irrational and immoral. This view bears clear marks of its Anglo-Saxon origin. It was easy after 1918 to convince that part of mankind which lives in English-speaking countries that war profits nobody. The argument did not seem particularly convincing to Germans, who had profited greatly from the wars of 1866 and 1870, and attributed their more recent sufferings, not to the war of 1914, but to the fact that they had lost it; or to Italians, who blamed not the war, but the treachery of allies who defrauded them in the peace settlement; or to Poles or Czecho-Slovaks who, far from deploring the war, owed their national existence to it; or to Frenchmen, who could not unreservedly regret a war which had restored Alsace-Lorraine to France; or to people of other nationalities who remembered profitable wars waged by Great Britain and the United States in the past. But these people had fortunately little influence over the formation of current theories of international relations, which emanated almost exclusively from the English-speaking countries. British and American writers continued to assume that the uselessness of war had been irrefutably demonstrated by the experience of 1914–18, and that an intellectual grasp of this fact was all that was necessary to induce the nations to keep the <a id="page_51"></a>peace in the future; and they were sincerely puzzled as well as disappointed at the failure of other countries to share this view.</p>
<p class="para">The confusion was increased by the ostentatious readiness of other countries to flatter the Anglo-Saxon world by repeating its slogans. In the fifteen years after the first world war, every Great Power (except, perhaps, Italy) repeatedly did lip-service to the doctrine by declaring peace to be one of the main objects of its policy.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn22" id="ch04_fn22">22</a> But as Lenin observed long ago, peace in itself is a meaningless aim. ‘Absolutely everybody is in favour of peace in general,’ he wrote in 1915, ‘including Kitchener, Joffre, Hindenburg and Nicholas the Bloody, for everyone of them wishes to end the war.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn23" id="ch04_fn23">23</a> The common interest in peace masks the fact that some nations desire to maintain the <span class="italic">status quo</span> without having to fight for it, and others to change the <span class="italic">status quo</span> without having to fight in order to do so.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn24" id="ch04_fn24">24</a> The statement that it is in the interest of the world as a whole either that the <span class="italic">status quo</span> should be maintained, or that it should be changed, would be contrary to the facts. The statement that it is in the interest of the world as a whole that the conclusion eventually reached, whether maintenance or change, should be reached by peaceful means, would command general assent, but seems a rather meaningless platitude. The utopian assumption that there is a world interest in peace which is identifiable with the interest of each individual nation helped politicians and political writers everywhere to evade the unpalatable fact of a fundamental divergence of interest between nations desirous of maintaining the status quo and nations desirous of changing it.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn25" id="ch04_fn25">25</a> A peculiar combination of platitude and falseness thus became endemic in the pronouncements of statesmen about international affairs. ‘In this whole Danubian area,’ said a Prime Minister of Czecho-Slovakia, ‘no one really wants conflicts and jealousies. The various countries want to maintain their independence, but otherwise they are ready for any co-operative measures. I am thinking specially of the Little Entente, Hungary and Bulgaria.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn26" id="ch04_fn26">26</a> Literally the words may pass as true. Yet the conflicts and jealousies which nobody wanted were a notorious feature of Danubian politics after 1919, and the co-operation for which all were ready was unobtainable. The fact of divergent interests was disguised and falsified by the platitude of a general desire to avoid conflict.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head6">International economic harmony</p>
<p class="NoIndent">In economic relations, the assumption of a general harmony of interests was made with even greater confidence; for here we have a direct reflexion of the cardinal doctrine of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> economics, and it is here that we can see most clearly the dilemma which results from the doctrine. When the <a id="page_52"></a>nineteenth-century liberal spoke of the greatest good of the greatest number, he tacitly assumed that the good of the minority might have to be sacrificed to it. This principle applied equally to international economic relations. If Russia or Italy, for example, were not strong enough to build up industries without the protection of tariffs, then – the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> liberal would have argued – they should be content to import British and German manufactures and supply wheat and oranges to the British and German markets. If anyone had thereupon objected that this policy would condemn Russia and Italy to remain second-rate Powers economically and militarily dependent on their neighbours, the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> liberal would have had to answer that this was the will of Providence and that this was what the general harmony of interests demanded. The modern utopian internationalist enjoys none of the advantages, and has none of the toughness, of the nineteenth-century liberal. The material success of the weaker Powers in building up protected industries, as well as the new spirit of internationalism, preclude him from arguing that the harmony of interests depends on the sacrifice of economically unfit nations. Yet the abandonment of this premiss destroys the whole basis of the doctrine which he has inherited; and he is driven to the belief that the common good can be achieved without any sacrifice of the good of any individual member of the community. Every international conflict is therefore unnecessary and illusory. It is only necessary to discover the common good which is at the same time the highest good of all the disputants; and only the folly of statesmen stands in the way of its discovery. The utopian, secure in his understanding of this common good, arrogates to himself the monopoly of wisdom. The statesmen of the world one and all stand convicted of incredible blindness to the interest of those whom they are supposed to represent. Such was the picture of the international scene presented, in all seriousness, by British and American writers, including not a few economists.</p>
<p class="para">It is for this reason that we find in the modern period an extraordinary divergence between the theories of economic experts and the practice of those responsible for the economic policies of their respective countries. Analysis will show that this divergence springs from a simple fact. The economic expert, dominated in the main by <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> doctrine, considers the hypothetical economic interest of the world as a whole, and is content to assume that this is identical with the interest of each individual country. The politician pursues the concrete interest of his country, and assumes (if he makes any assumption at all) that the interest of the world as a whole is identical with it. Nearly every pronouncement of every international economic conference held between the two world wars was vitiated by this assumption that there was some ‘solution’ or <a id="page_53"></a>‘plan’ which, by a judicious balancing of interests, would be equally favourable to all and prejudicial to none.</p>
<p class="extract">Any strictly nationalistic policy [declared the League Conference of economic experts in 1927] is harmful not only to the nation which practises it but also to the others, and therefore defeats its own end, and if it be desired that the new state of mind revealed by the Conference should lead rapidly to practical results, any programme of execution must include, as an essential factor, the principle of parallel or concerted action by the different nations. Every country will then know that the concessions it is asked to make will be balanced by corresponding sacrifices on the part of the other countries. It will be able to accept the proposed measures, not merely in view of its own individual position, <span class="italic">but also because it is interested in the success of the general plan laid down by the Conference</span>.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn27" id="ch04_fn27">27</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The sequel of the Conference was the complete neglect of all the recommendations unanimously made by it; and if we are not content to accept the facile explanation that the leading statesmen of the world were either criminal or mad, we may begin to suspect the validity of its initial assumption. It seems altogether rash to suppose that economic nationalism is necessarily detrimental to states which practise it. In the nineteenth century, Germany and the United States, by pursuing a ‘strictly nationalistic policy’, had placed themselves in a position to challenge Great Britain’s virtual monopoly of world trade. No conference of economic experts, meeting in 1880, could have evolved a ‘general plan’ for ‘parallel or concerted action’ which would have allayed the economic rivalries of the time in a manner equally advantageous to Great Britain, Germany and the United States. It was not less presumptuous to suppose that a conference meeting in 1927 could allay the economic rivalries of the later period by a ‘plan’ beneficial to the interests of everyone. Even the economic crisis of 1930–33 failed to bring home to the economists the true nature of the problem which they had to face. The experts who prepared the ‘Draft Annotated Agenda’ for the World Economic Conference of 1933 condemned the ‘worldwide adoption of ideals of national self-sufficiency which cut unmistakably athwart the lines of economic development’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn28" id="ch04_fn28">28</a> They did not apparently pause to reflect that those so-called ‘lines of economic development’, which might be beneficial to some countries and even to the world as a whole, would inevitably be detrimental to other countries, which were using weapons of economic nationalism in self-defence. The Van Zeeland report of January 1938 began by asking, and answering in the affirmative, the question whether ‘the methods which, <a id="page_54"></a>taken as a whole, form the system of international trade’ are ‘fundamentally preferable’ to ‘autarkic tendencies’. Yet every Power at some period of its history, and as a rule for prolonged periods, has resorted to ‘autarkic tendencies’. It is difficult to believe that there is any absolute sense in which ‘autarkic tendencies’ are always detrimental to those who pursue them. Even if they could be justified only as the lesser of two evils, the initial premise of the Van Zeeland report was invalidated. But there was worse to come. ‘We must . . . make our dispositions’, continued M. Van Zeeland, ‘in such a way that the new system shall offer to all participators advantages greater than those of the position in which they now find themselves.’<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn29" id="ch04_fn29">29</a> This is economic utopianism in its most purblind form. The report, like the reports of 1927 and 1933, assumed the existence of a fundamental principle of economic policy whose application would be equally beneficial to all states and detrimental to none; and for this reason it remained, like its predecessors, a dead letter.</p>
<p class="para">Economic theory, as opposed to economic practice, was so powerfully dominated in the years between the two world wars by the supposed harmony of interests that it is difficult to find, in the innumerable international discussions of the period, any clear exposition of the real problem which baffled the statesmen of the world. Perhaps the frankest statement was one made by the Yugoslav Foreign Minister at the session of the Commission for European Union in January 1931. Arthur Henderson, on behalf of Great Britain, following the Netherlands delegate Dr Colijn, had pleaded for an all-round tariff reduction ‘which must, by its nature, bring benefit to each and all by allowing that expansion of production and international exchange of wealth by which the common prosperity of all can be increased’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn30" id="ch04_fn30">30</a> Marinkovitch, who spoke next, concluded from the failure to carry out the recommendations of the 1927 Conference, that ‘there were extremely important reasons why the governments could not apply’ those resolutions. He went on:</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="extract1">The fact is that apart from economic considerations there are also political and social considerations. The old ‘things-will-right-themselves’ school of economists argued that if nothing were done and events were allowed to follow their natural course from an economic point of view, economic equilibrium would come about of its own accord. That is probably true (I do not propose to discuss the point). But how would that equilibrium come about? At the expense of the weakest. Now, as you are aware, for more than seventy years there has been a powerful and growing reaction against this theory of economics. All the socialist parties of Europe and the world are merely the expression of the opposition to this way of looking at economic problems.</p>
<p class="extract1"><a id="page_55"></a>   We were told that we ought to lower customs barriers and even abolish them. As far as the agricultural states of Europe are concerned, if they could keep the promises they made in 1927 – admitting that the statements of 1927 did contain promises – and could carry that policy right through, we might perhaps find ourselves able to hold our own against overseas competition in the matter of agricultural products. But at the same time we should have to create in Poland, Roumania and Yugoslavia the same conditions as exist in Canada and the Argentine, where vast territories are inhabited by a scanty population and where machinery and other devices are employed. . . . We could not sacrifice our people by shooting them, but they would nevertheless be killed off by famine – which would come to the same thing.</p>
<p class="extract1">   I am sure that the key to which M. Colijn has referred does not exist. Economic and social life is too complicated to allow of a solution by any one formula; it calls for complicated solutions. We shall have to take into account the many varieties of geographical, political, social and other conditions which exist.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn31" id="ch04_fn31">31</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent">Marinkovitch went on to dispose of the theory of the ‘long-run’ harmony of interests:</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="extract1">Last year, when I was in the Yugoslav mountains, I heard that the inhabitants of a small mountain village, having no maize or wheat on which to live, were simply cutting down a wood which belonged to them . . . and were living on what they earned by selling the wood. . . . I went to the village, collected together some of the leading inhabitants and endeavoured to reason with them, just like the great industrial states reason with us. I said to them: ‘You possess plenty of common sense. You see that your forest is becoming smaller and smaller. What will you do when you cut down the last tree?’ They replied to me: ‘Your Excellency, that is a point which worries us: but on the other hand, what should we do now if we stopped cutting down our trees?’</p>
<p class="extract1">   I can assure you that the agricultural countries are in exactly the same situation. You threaten them with future disasters; but they are already in the throes of disaster.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn32" id="ch04_fn32">32</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent">One further example of unwonted frankness may be quoted. Speaking in September 1937 over one of the United States broadcasting systems, the President of the Colombian Republic said:</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="extract1">In no field of human activity are the benefits of the crisis as clear as in the relationships between nations and especially of the American <a id="page_56"></a>nations. If it is true that the economic relations have become rigorous and at times harsh, it is also true that they have fortunately become more democratic.</p>
<p class="extract1">   The crisis freed many countries which had up to then been subordinated to the double mental and financial imperialism of the nations which controlled international markets and policies. Many nations learned to trust less international cordiality and to seek an autonomous life, full of initial obstacles but which nevertheless created strong interests within a short time . . .</p>
<p class="extract1">   When the arbitrary systems that prevail today begin to be relaxed, there will be a weaker international trade, but there will also be a larger number of nations economically strong.</p>
<p class="extract1">   Economic co-operation today is a very different and more noble thing than the old co-operation which was based on the convenience of industrial countries and of bankers who tutored the world. The certainty acquired by many small nations that they can subsist and prosper without subordinating their conduct and their activities to foreign interests has begun to introduce a greater frankness and equality in the relations between modern nations . . .</p>
<p class="extract1">   It is true that the crisis has shipwrecked many high and noble principles of our civilization; but it is also true that in this return to a kind of primitive struggle for existence, peoples are being freed of many fictions and of much hypocrisy which they had accepted in the belief that with them they were insuring their well-being . . .</p>
<p class="extract1">   The foundation of international economic freedom lies in the recognition that when strong nations place themselves on the defensive, they act just like the weak ones do, and that all of them have an equal right to defend themselves with their own resources.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn33" id="ch04_fn33">33</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent">The claims made on behalf of the Colombian Republic were perhaps exaggerated. But both the Yugoslav and the Colombian statements were powerful challenges to the doctrine of the harmony of interests. It is fallacy to suppose that, because Great Britain and the United States have an interest in the removal of trade barriers, this is also an interest of Yugoslavia and Colombia. International trade may be weaker. The economic interests of Europe or of the world at large may suffer. But Yugoslavia and Colombia will be better off than they would have been under a régime of European or world prosperity which reduced them to the position of satellites. Dr Schacht spoke a little later of those ‘fanatical adherents of the most-favoured-nation policy abroad, who from the abundance of their wealth cannot realize that a poor nation has nevertheless the courage to live by its own laws instead of suffering under the prescriptions of the well-to-do’.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn34" id="ch04_fn34">34</a> <a id="page_57"></a><span class="italic">Laissez-faire</span>, in international relations as in those between capital and labour, is the paradise of the economically strong. State control, whether in the form of protective legislation or of protective tariffs, is the weapon of self-defence invoked by the economically weak. The clash of interests is real and inevitable; and the whole nature of the problem is distorted by an attempt to disguise it.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head7">The harmony broken</p>
<p class="NoIndent">We must therefore reject as inadequate and misleading the attempt to base international morality on an alleged harmony of interests which identifies the interest of the whole community of nations with the interest of each individual member of it. In the nineteenth century, this attempt met with widespread success, thanks to the continuously expanding economy in which it was made. The period was one of progressive prosperity, punctuated only by minor set-backs. The international economic structure bore considerable resemblance to the domestic economic structure of the United States. Pressure could at once be relieved by expansion to hitherto unoccupied and unexploited territories; and there was a plentiful supply of cheap labour, and of backward countries, which had not yet reached the level of political consciousness. Enterprising individuals could solve the economic problem by migration, enterprising nations by colonization. Expanding markets produced an expanding population, and population in turn reacted on markets. Those who were left behind in the race could plausibly be regarded as the unfit. A harmony of interests among the fit, based on individual enterprise and free competition, was sufficiently near to reality to form a sound basis for the current theory. With some difficulty the illusion was kept alive till 1914. Even British prosperity, though its foundations were menaced by German and American competition, continued to expand. The year 1913 was a record year for British trade.</p>
<p class="para">The transition from the apparent harmony to the transparent clash of interests may be placed about the turn of the century. Appropriately enough, it found its first expression in colonial policies. In the British mind, it was primarily associated with events in South Africa. Mr Churchill dates the beginning of ‘these violent times’ from the Jameson Raid.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn35" id="ch04_fn35">35</a> In North Africa and the Far East, there was a hasty scramble by the European Powers to secure the few eligible sites which were still vacant. Emigration of individuals from Europe, the point of principal tension, to America assumed unparalleled dimensions. In Europe itself, anti-Semitism – the recurrent symptom of economic stress – reappeared after a long interval in Russia, Germany and France.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn36" id="ch04_fn36">36</a> In Great Britain, agitation against <a id="page_58"></a>unrestricted alien immigration began in the 1890s; and the first act controlling immigration was passed in 1905.</p>
<p class="para">The first world war, which proceeded from this growing tension, aggravated it tenfold by intensifying its fundamental causes. In belligerent and neutral countries in Europe, Asia and America industrial and agricultural production were everywhere artificially stimulated. After the war every country struggled to maintain its expanded production; and an enhanced and inflamed national consciousness was invoked to justify the struggle. One reason for the unprecedented vindictiveness of the peace treaties, and in particular of their economic clauses, was that practical men no longer believed – as they had done fifty or a hundred years earlier – in an underlying harmony of interests between victors and defeated. The object was now to eliminate a competitor, a revival of whose prosperity might menace your own. In Europe, the struggle was intensified by the creation of new states and new economic frontiers. In Asia, India and China built up large-scale manufactures to make themselves independent of imports from Europe. Japan became an exporter of textiles and other cheap goods which undercut European manufactures on the world market. Most important of all, there were no more open spaces anywhere awaiting cheap and profitable development and exploitation. The ample avenues of migration which had relieved the economic pressures of the pre-war period were closed; and in place of the natural flow of migration came the problem of forcibly evicted refugees.<a class="sup" href="#ch04-fn37" id="ch04_fn37">37</a> The complex phenomenon known as economic nationalism swept over the world. The fundamental character of this clash of interests became obvious to all except those confirmed utopians who dominated economic thought in the English-speaking countries. The hollowness of the glib nineteenth-century platitude that nobody can benefit from what harms another was revealed. The basic presupposition of utopianism had broken down.</p>
<p class="para">What confronts us in international politics today is, therefore, nothing less than the complete bankruptcy of the conception of morality which has dominated political and economic thought for a century and a half. Internationally, it is no longer possible to deduce virtue from right reasoning, because it is no longer seriously possible to believe that every state, by pursuing the greatest good of the whole world, is pursuing the greatest good of its own citizens, and vice versa. The synthesis of morality and reason, at any rate in the crude form in which it was achieved by nineteenth-century liberalism, is untenable. The inner meaning of the modern international crisis is the collapse of the whole structure of utopianism based on the concept of the harmony of interests. The present generation will have to rebuild from the foundations. But before we can <a id="page_59"></a>do this, before we can ascertain what can be salved from the ruins, we must examine the flaws in the structure which led to its collapse; and we can best do this by analysing the realist critique of the utopian assumptions.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch04-head8">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn1" id="ch04-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Burke, <span class="italic">Works</span>, v. 407.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn2" id="ch04-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Adam Smith, <span class="italic">The Wealth of Nations</span>, Book I. ch. xi. conclusion.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn3" id="ch04-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Ibid.</span>, Book IV. ch. ii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn4" id="ch04-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in J. M. Keynes, A <span class="italic">Tract on Monetary Reform</span>, p. 7.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn5" id="ch04-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in J. Truslow Adams, <span class="italic">The Epic of America</span>, p. 400. I have failed to trace the original.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn6" id="ch04-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See pp. 80–1.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn7" id="ch04-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Nationalism: A Study by a Group of Members of the Royal Institute of International Affairs</span>, p. 229.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn8" id="ch04-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">K. Mannheim, <span class="italic">Mensch und Gesellschaft im Zeitalter des Umbaus</span>, p. 104.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn9" id="ch04-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. S. Mill, <span class="italic">Principles of Political Economy</span>, II. Book V. ch. xi.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn10" id="ch04-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Romilly, <span class="italic">Thoughts on the Influence of the French Revolution</span>, p. 5.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn11" id="ch04-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">T. H. Green, <span class="italic">Principles of Political Obligation</span>, § 166.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn12" id="ch04-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Mr Eden, for example, in 1938 advocated ‘a comity of nations in which each can develop and flourish and give to their uttermost their own special contribution to the diversity of life’ (Anthony Eden, <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, p. 277).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn13" id="ch04-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bastiat, <span class="italic">Les Harmonies</span> <span class="italic">Économiques,</span> p. 355.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn14" id="ch04-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Marx, <span class="italic">Theorien u ber den Mebrwert</span>, II, i. p. 309.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn15" id="ch04-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bagehot, <span class="italic">Physics and Politics</span> (2nd ed.), p. 215. What does ‘material’ mean in this passage? Does it merely mean ‘relevant’? Or is the writer conscious of an uncomfortable antithesis between ‘material’ and ‘moral’?</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn16" id="ch04-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. Novicow, <span class="italic">La Politique Internationale</span>, p. 242.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn17" id="ch04-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Karl Pearson<span class="italic">, National Life from the Standpoint of Science</span>, p. 64.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn18" id="ch04-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">W. L. Langer, <span class="italic">The Diplomacy of Imperialism</span>, ii. p. 797.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn19" id="ch04-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Huxley, Romanes Lecture, 1893, reprinted in <span class="italic">Evolution and Ethics</span>, p. 81.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn20" id="ch04-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Balfour, <span class="italic">Foundations of Belief</span>, p. 27.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn21" id="ch04-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The confusion between the two was admirably illustrated by an interjection of Mr Attlee in the House of Commons: ‘It was precisely the object of the establishment of the League of Nations that the preservation of peace was a common interest of the world’ (House of Commons, 21 December 1937: <span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. 1811). Mr Attlee apparently failed to distinguish between the proposition that a natural community of interests existed and the proposition that the League of Nations had been established to create one.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn22" id="ch04-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Peace must prevail, must come before all’ (Briand, <span class="italic">League of Nations: Ninth Assembly</span>, p. 83). ‘The maintenance of peace is the first objective of British foreign policy’ (Eden, <span class="italic">League of Nations: Sixteenth Assembly</span>, p. 106). ‘Peace is our dearest treasure’ (Hitler, in a speech in the German Reichstag on 30 January 1937, reported in <span class="italic">The Times</span>, 1 February 1937). ‘The principal aim of the international policy of the Soviet Union is the preservation of peace’ (Chicherin in <span class="italic">The Soviet Union and Peace</span> (1929), p. 249). ‘The object of Japan, despite propaganda to the contrary, is peace’ (Matsuoka, <span class="italic">League of Nations: Special Assembly 1932–33</span>, iii. p. 73). The paucity of Italian pronouncements in favour of peace was probably explained by the poor reputation of Italian troops as fighters: Mussolini feared that any emphatic expression of preference for peace would be construed as an admission that Italy had no stomach for war.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><a id="page_60"></a><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn23" id="ch04-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lenin, <span class="italic">Collected Works</span> (Engl. transl.), xviii. p. 264. Compare Spencer Wilkinson’s dictum: ‘It is not peace but preponderance that is in each case the real object. The truth cannot be too often repeated that peace is never the object of policy: you cannot define peace except by reference to war, which is a means and never an end’ (<span class="italic">Government and the War</span>, p. 121).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn24" id="ch04-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘When a saint complains that people do not know the things belonging to their peace, what he really means is that they do not sufficiently care about the things belonging to his peace’ (<span class="italic">The Note-Books of Samuel Butler</span>, ed. Festing-Jones, pp. 211–12). This would seem to be true of those latter-day saints, the satisfied Powers.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn25" id="ch04-fn25">25.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It is sometimes maintained not merely that all nations have an equal interest in preferring peace to war (which is, in a sense, true), but that war can never in any circumstances bring to the victor advantages comparable with its cost. The latter view does not appear to be true of the past, though it is possible to argue (as does Bertrand Russell, <span class="italic">Which Way Peace?</span>) that it is true of modern warfare. If accepted, this view leads, of course, to absolute pacifism; for there is no reason to suppose that it is any truer of ‘defensive’ than of ‘offensive’ war (assuming the distinction between them to be valid).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn26" id="ch04-fn26">26.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Daily Telegraph</span>, 26 August 1938.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn27" id="ch04-fn27">27.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations</span>: C.E.I. 44, p. 21 (italics in original).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn28" id="ch04-fn28">28.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations</span>: C.48, M.18, 1933, ii. p. 6.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn29" id="ch04-fn29">29.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Report . . . on the Possibility of Obtaining a General Reduction of the Obstacles to International Trade</span>, Cmd 5648.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn30" id="ch04-fn30">30.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations</span>: C.144, M.45, 1931, vii. p. 30.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn31" id="ch04-fn31">31.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations</span>: C.144, M.45, 1931, vii. p. 31.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn32" id="ch04-fn32">32.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Ibid.,</span> p. 32.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn33" id="ch04-fn33">33.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Address broadcast by the Columbia Broadcasting System, USA, on 19 September 1937, and published in <span class="italic">Talks</span>, October 1937.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn34" id="ch04-fn34">34.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Address to the Economic Council of the German Academy, 29 November 1938.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn35" id="ch04-fn35">35.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Winston Churchill, <span class="italic">World Crisis</span>, p. 26.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch04_fn36" id="ch04-fn36">36.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The same conditions encouraged the growth of Zionism; for Zionism, as the Palestine Royal Commission of 1937 remarked, ‘on its negative side is a creed of escape’ (Cmd 5479, p. 13).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_61"></a><a href="#ch04_fn37" id="ch04-fn37">37.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘The existence of refugees is a symptom of the disappearance of economic and political liberalism. Refugees are the by-product of an economic isolationism which has practically stopped free migration’ (J. Hope Simpson, <span class="italic">Refugees: Preliminary Report of a Survey</span>, p. 193).</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>