<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_84"></a>CHAPTER SIX</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">The Limitations of Realism</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The exposure by realist criticism of the hollowness of the utopian edifice is the first task of the political thinker. It is only when the sham has been demolished that there can be any hope of raising a more solid structure in its place. But we cannot ultimately find a resting place in pure realism; for realism, though logically overwhelming, does not provide us with the springs of action which are necessary even to the pursuit of thought. Indeed, realism itself, if we attack it with its own weapons, often turns out in practice to be just as much conditioned as any other mode of thought. In politics, the belief that certain facts are unalterable or certain trends irresistible commonly reflects a lack of desire or lack of interest to change or resist them. The impossibility of being a consistent and thorough-going realist is one of the most certain and most curious lessons of political science. Consistent realism excludes four things which appear to be essential ingredients of all effective political thinking: a finite goal, an emotional appeal, a right of moral judgement and a ground for action.</p>
<p class="para">The conception of politics as an infinite process seems in the long run uncongenial or incomprehensible to the human mind. Every political thinker who wishes to make an appeal to his contemporaries is consciously or unconsciously led to posit a finite goal. Treitschke declared that the ‘terrible thing’ about Machiavelli’s teaching was ‘not the immorality of the methods he recommends, but the lack of content of the state, which exists only in order to exist’.<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn1" id="ch06_fn1">1</a> In fact, Machiavelli is not so consistent. His realism breaks down in the last chapter of <span class="italic">The Prince</span>, which is entitled ‘An Exhortation to free Italy from the Barbarians’ – a goal whose necessity could be deduced from no realist premise. Marx, having dissolved human thought and action into the relativism of the dialectic, postulates the absolute goal of a classless society where the dialectic no longer operates – that one far-off event towards which, in true Victorian fashion, he believed the whole creation to be moving. The realist thus ends by negating his own postulate and assuming an ultimate reality outside the historical process. Engels was one of the first to level this charge against Hegel. ‘The whole dogmatic content of the Hegelian system is declared to be absolute truth in contradiction to his dialectical method, which dissolves all dogmatism.’<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn2" id="ch06_fn2">2</a> <a id="page_85"></a>But Marx lays himself open to precisely the same criticism when he brings the process of dialectical materialism to an end with the victory of the proletariat. Thus utopianism penetrates the citadel of realism; and to envisage a continuing, but not infinite, process towards a finite goal is shown to be a condition of political thought. The greater the emotional stress, the nearer and more concrete is the goal. The first world war was rendered tolerable by the belief that it was the last of wars. Woodrow Wilson’s moral authority was built up on the conviction, shared by himself, that he possessed the key to a just, comprehensive and final settlement of the political ills of mankind. It is noteworthy that almost all religions agree in postulating an ultimate state of complete blessedness.</p>
<p class="para">The finite goal, assuming the character of an apocalyptic vision, thereby acquires an emotional, irrational appeal which realism itself cannot justify or explain. Everyone knows Marx’s famous prediction of the future classless paradise:</p>
<p class="extract">When work ceases to be merely a means of life and becomes the first living need; when, with the all-round development of the individual, productive forces also develop, and all the sources of collective wealth flow in free abundance – then only will it be possible to transcend completely the narrow horizon of <span class="italic">bourgeois</span> right, and society can inscribe on its banner: From each according to his capacities, to each according to his needs.<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn3" id="ch06_fn3">3</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Sorel proclaimed the necessity of a ‘myth’ to make revolutionary teaching effective; and Soviet Russia has exploited for this purpose the myth, first of world revolution, and more recently of the ‘socialist fatherland’. There is much to be said for Professor Laski’s view that ‘communism has made its way by its idealism, and not by its realism, by its spiritual promise, not by its materialistic prospects’.<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn4" id="ch06_fn4">4</a> A modern theologian has analysed the situation with almost cynical clear-sightedness:</p>
<p class="extract">Without the ultrarational hopes and passions of religion, no society will have the courage to conquer despair and attempt the impossible; for the vision of a just society is an impossible one, which can be approximated only by those who do not regard it as impossible. The truest visions of religion are illusions, which may be partly realized by being resolutely believed.<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn5" id="ch06_fn5">5</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">And this again closely echoes a passage in <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span> in which Hitler contrasts the ‘programme-maker’ with the politician:</p>
<p class="extract">His [i.e. the programme-maker’s] significance lies almost wholly in the future, and he is often what one means by the word ‘<span class="italic">weltfremd</span>’ <a id="page_86"></a>[unpractical, utopian]. For if the art of the politician is really the art of the possible, then the programme-maker belongs to those of whom it is said that they please the gods only if they ask and demand from them the impossible.<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn6" id="ch06_fn6">6</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="italic">Credo quia impossible</span> becomes a category of political thinking.</p>
<p class="para">Consistent realism, as has already been noted, involves acceptance of the whole historical process and precludes moral judgements on it. As we have seen, men are generally prepared to accept the judgement of history on the past, praising success and condemning failure. This test is also widely applied to contemporary politics. Such institutions as the League of Nations, or the Soviet or Fascist régimes, are to a considerable extent judged by their capacity to achieve what they profess to achieve; and the legitimacy of this test is implicitly admitted by their own propaganda, which constantly seeks to exaggerate their successes and minimize their failures. Yet it is clear that mankind as a whole is not prepared to accept this rational test as a universally valid basis of political judgement. The belief that whatever succeeds is right, and has only to be understood to be approved, must, if consistently held, empty thought of purpose, and thereby sterilize and ultimately destroy it. Nor do those whose philosophy appears to exclude the possibility of moral judgements in fact refrain from pronouncing them. Frederick the Great, having explained that treaties should be observed for the reason that ‘one can trick only once’, goes on to call the breaking of treaties ‘a bad and knavish policy’, though there is nothing in his thesis to justify the moral epithet.<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn7" id="ch06_fn7">7</a> Marx, whose philosophy appeared to demonstrate that capitalists could only act in a certain way, spends many pages – some of the most effective in <span class="italic">Capital</span> – in denouncing the wickedness of capitalists for behaving in precisely that way. The necessity, recognized by all politicians, both in domestic and in international affairs, for cloaking interests in a guise of moral principles is in itself a symptom of the inadequacy of realism. Every age claims the right to create its own values, and to pass judgements in the light of them; and even if it uses realist weapons to dissolve other values, it still believes in the absolute character of its own. It refuses to accept the implication of realism that the word ‘ought’ is meaningless.</p>
<p class="para">Most of all, consistent realism breaks down because it fails to provide any ground for purposive or meaningful action. If the sequence of cause and effect is sufficiently rigid to permit of the ‘scientific prediction’ of events, if our thought is irrevocably conditioned by our status and our interests, then both action and thought become devoid of purpose. If, as Schopenhauer maintains, ‘the true philosophy of history consists of the insight that, throughout the jumble of all these ceaseless changes, we have <a id="page_87"></a>ever before our eyes the same unchanging being, pursuing the same course to-day, yesterday and for ever’,<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn8" id="ch06_fn8">8</a> then passive contemplation is all that remains to the individual. Such a conclusion is plainly repugnant to the most deep-seated belief of man about himself. That human affairs can be directed and modified by human action and human thought is a postulate so fundamental that its rejection seems scarcely compatible with existence as a human being. Nor is it in fact rejected by those realists who have left their mark on history. Machiavelli, when he exhorted his compatriots to be good Italians, clearly assumed that they were free to follow or ignore his advice. Marx, by birth and training a <span class="italic">bourgeois</span>, believed himself free to think and act like a proletarian, and regarded it as his mission to persuade others, whom he assumed to be equally free, to think and act likewise. Lenin, who wrote of the imminence of world revolution as a ‘scientific prediction’, admitted elsewhere that ‘no situation exists from which there is absolutely no way out’.<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn9" id="ch06_fn9">9</a> In moments of crisis, Lenin appealed to his followers in terms which might equally well have been used by so thorough-going a believer in the power of the human will as Mussolini or by any other leader of any period: ‘At the decisive moment and in the decisive place, you <span class="italic">must prove</span> the stronger, you must <span class="italic">be victorious</span>.’<a class="sup" href="#ch06-fn10" id="ch06_fn10">10</a> Every realist, whatever his profession, is ultimately compelled to believe not only that there is something which man ought to think and do, but that there is something which he can think and do, and that his thought and action are neither mechanical nor meaningless.</p>
<p class="para">We return therefore to the conclusion that any sound political thought must be based on elements of both utopia and reality. Where utopianism has become a hollow and intolerable sham, which serves merely as a disguise for the interests of the privileged, the realist performs an indispensable service in unmasking it. But pure realism can offer nothing but a naked struggle for power which makes any kind of international society impossible. Having demolished the current utopia with the weapons of realism, we still need to build a new utopia of our own, which will one day fall to the same weapons. The human will will continue to seek an escape from the logical consequences of realism in the vision of an international order which, as soon as it crystallizes itself into concrete political form, becomes tainted with self-interest and hypocrisy, and must once more be attacked with the instruments of realism.</p>
<p class="para">Here, then, is the complexity, the fascination and the tragedy of all political life. Politics are made up of two elements – utopia and reality – belonging to two different planes which can never meet. There is no greater barrier to clear political thinking than failure to distinguish between ideals, which are utopia, and institutions, which are reality. The communist who set communism against democracy was usually thinking <a id="page_88"></a>of communism as a pure ideal of equality and brotherhood, and of democracy as an institution which existed in Great Britain, France or the United States and which exhibited the vested interests, the inequalities and the oppression inherent in all political institutions. The democrat who made the same comparison was in fact comparing an ideal pattern of democracy laid up in heaven with communism as an institution existing in Soviet Russia with class divisions, its heresy hunts and its concentration camps. The comparison, made in each case between an ideal and an institution, is irrelevant and makes no sense. The ideal, once it is embodied in an institution, ceases to be an ideal and becomes the expression of a selfish interest, which must be destroyed in the name of a new ideal. This constant interaction of irreconcilable forces is the stuff of politics. Every political situation contains mutually incompatible elements of utopia and reality, of morality and power.</p>
<p class="para">This point will emerge more clearly from the analysis of the nature of politics which we have now to undertake.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch06-head1">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn1" id="ch06-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Treitschke, <span class="italic">Aufsätze</span>, iv. p. 428.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn2" id="ch06-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Engels, <span class="italic">Ludwig Feuerbach</span> (Engl. transl.), p. 23.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn3" id="ch06-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Marx and Engels, <span class="italic">Works</span> (Russian ed.), xv. p. 275.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn4" id="ch06-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Laski, <span class="italic">Communism</span>, p. 250.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn5" id="ch06-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. Neibuhr, <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society</span>, p. 81.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn6" id="ch06-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 231.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn7" id="ch06-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Anti-Machiavel</span>, p. 248.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn8" id="ch06-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Schopenhauer, <span class="italic">Welt als Wille und Vorstellung</span>, ii. ch. 38.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn9" id="ch06-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Lenin, Works</span> (2nd Russian ed.), xxv. p. 340.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch06_fn10" id="ch06-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Lenin, Collected Works</span> (Engl. transl.), xxi. pt. i. p. 68.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>