<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_135"></a>CHAPTER NINE</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">Morality in International Politics</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The place of morality in international politics is the most obscure and difficult problem in the whole range of international studies. Two reasons for its obscurity, one general and one particular, may be suggested.</p>
<p class="para">In the first place, most discussions about morality are obscured by the fact that the term is commonly used to connote at least three different things:</p>
<table class="extractTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="paraRight">(i)</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">The moral code of the philosopher, which is the kind of morality most rarely practised but most frequently discussed.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="paraRight">(ii)</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">The moral code of the ordinary man, which is sometimes practised but rarely discussed (for the ordinary man seldom examines the moral assumptions which underlie his actions and his judgements and, if he does, is peculiarly liable to self-deception).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="paraRight">(iii)</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">The moral behaviour of the ordinary man, which will stand in fairly close relation to (ii), but in hardly any relation at all to (i).</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="NoIndent">It may be observed that the relationship between (ii) and (iii) is mutual. Not only is the behaviour of the ordinary man influenced by his moral code, but his moral code is influenced by the way in which ordinary men, including himself, behave. This is particularly true of the ordinary man’s view of political morality, which tends, more than personal morality, to be a codification of existing practice, and in which the expectation of reciprocity always plays an important part.</p>
<p class="para">The monopoly of international studies between the two wars by the utopian school resulted in a concentration of interest on discussions of the question what international morality ought ideally to be. There was little discussion of the moral behaviour of states except to pass hasty and sweeping condemnation on it in the light of this ideal morality. There was no discussion at all of the assumptions of the ordinary man about international morality. This was particularly unfortunate at a period in which the popularization of politics for the first time made the assumptions of the ordinary man a matter of primary importance; and the ever-widening rift between the international utopia and international reality might have been described in terms of this divergence between the <a id="page_136"></a>theory of the philosopher and practice based on the unexpressed and often unconscious assumptions of the ordinary man. Moreover, utopia met its usual fate in becoming, unknown to itself, the tool of vested interests. International morality, as expounded by most contemporary Anglo-Saxon writers, became little more than a convenient weapon for belabouring those who assailed the <span class="italic">status quo</span>. Here as elsewhere, the student of international politics cannot wholly divest himself of utopianism. But he will be well advised to keep his feet on the ground and rigorously maintain contact between his ambitions for the future and the realities of the present. Nor should this be too difficult. The anthropologist who investigates the moral codes and behaviour of a cannibal tribe probably starts from the presupposition that cannibalism is undesirable, and is conscious of the desire that it should be abolished. But he may well be sceptical of the value of denunciations of cannibalism, and will in any case not mistake such denunciations for a scientific study of the subject. The same clarity of thought has not always distinguished students of international morality, who have generally preferred the role of the missionary to that of the scientist.</p>
<p class="para">The second obscurity is peculiar to the international field. Strange as it may appear, writers on international morality are not agreed among themselves – and are not always clear in their own minds – whether the morality which they wish to discuss is the morality of states or the morality of individuals. This point is so vital to the whole discussion that it must be cleared up on the threshold of our enquiry.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head1">The nature of international morality</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The period of absolute personal rule in which the modern state first began to take shape was not much troubled by distinction between personal and state morality. The personal responsibility of the prince for acts of state could be assumed without any undue straining of the facts. Charles I may have been a good father and a bad king. But in both capacities, his acts could be treated as those of an individual.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn1" id="ch09_fn1">1</a> When, however, the growing complication of the state machine and the development of constitutional government made the personal responsibility of the monarch a transparent travesty, the personality (which seemed a necessary condition of moral responsibility) was transferred from the monarch to the state. Leviathan, as Hobbes said, is an ‘Artificial Man’. This was an important step forward. It was the personification of the state which made possible the creation of international law on the basis of natural law. States could be assumed to have duties to one another only in virtue of the fiction which treated them as if they were persons. But the personification of the state was a <a id="page_137"></a>convenient way of conferring on it not merely duties, but rights; and with the growth of state power in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries state rights became more conspicuous than state duties. Thus the personification of the state, which began as a liberal and progressive device, came to be associated with the assertion of unlimited rights of the state over the individual and is now commonly denounced as reactionary and authoritarian. Modern utopian thinkers reject it with fervour,<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn2" id="ch09_fn2">2</a> and are consequently led to deny that morality can be attributed to the state. International morality must, on this view, be the morality of individuals.</p>
<p class="para">The controversy about the attribution of personality to the state is not only misleading, but meaningless. To deny personality to the state is just as absurd as to assert it. The personality of the state is not a fact whose truth or falsehood is a matter for argument. It is what international lawyers have called ‘the postulated nature’ of the state.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn3" id="ch09_fn3">3</a> It is a necessary fiction or hypothesis – an indispensable tool devised by the human mind for dealing with the structure of a developed society.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn4" id="ch09_fn4">4</a> It is theoretically possible to imagine a primitive political order in which individuals are individuals and nothing more, just as it is possible to imagine an economic order in which all producers and traders are individuals. But just as economic development necessitated resort to the fiction of corporate responsibility in such forms as that of the joint-stock company, so political development necessitated the fiction of the corporate responsibility of the state. Nor are the rights and obligations of these fictitious entities regarded as purely legal. A bank is praised for generosity to its employees, an armaments firm is attacked for unpatriotic conduct, and railways have ‘obligations to the public’ and demand a ‘square deal’ – all issues implying the relevance, not merely of legal, but of moral standards. The fiction of the group-person, having moral rights and obligations and consequently capable of moral behaviour, is an indispensable instrument of modern society; and the most indispensable of these fictitious group-persons is the state. In particular, it does not seem possible to discuss international politics in other terms. ‘Relations between Englishmen and Italians’ is not a synonym for ‘relations between Great Britain and Italy’. It is a curious and significant paradox that those utopian writers on international affairs who most vigorously denounce the personification of the state as absurd and sinister none the less persistently allocate moral praise and blame (generally the latter) to those imaginary entities, ‘Great Britain’, ‘France’ and ‘Italy’, whose existence they deny.</p>
<p class="para">Continuity is another element in society which makes the fiction of the group-person indispensable. The keenest objectors to the personification of the state will have no qualms about celebrating the 150th anniversary of <span class="italic">The Times</span> or the 38th victory of ‘Cambridge’ in the boat race, and will confidently expect ‘the London County Council’ to repay, fifty years <a id="page_138"></a>hence, money which ‘it’ borrows and spends to-day. Personification is the category of thought which expresses the continuity of institutions; and of all institutions the state is the one whose continuity it is most essential to express. The question whether the Belgian Guarantee Treaty of 1839 imposed an obligation on Great Britain to assist Belgium in 1914 raised both legal and moral issues. But it cannot be intelligently discussed except by assuming that the obligation rested neither personally on Palmerston who signed the treaty of 1839, nor personally on Asquith and Grey who had to decide the issue in 1914, neither on all individual Englishmen alive in 1839, nor on all individual Englishmen alive in 1914, but on that fictitious group-person ‘Great Britain’, which was regarded as capable of moral or immoral behaviour in honouring or dishonouring an obligation.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn5" id="ch09_fn5">5</a> In short, international morality is the morality of states. The hypothesis of state personality and state responsibility is neither true nor false, because it does not purport to be a fact, but a category of thought necessary to clear thinking about international relations. It is true that another moral issue was also raised in 1914 – the obligation of individual Englishmen. But this was an obligation to ‘Great Britain’, arising out of the obligation of ‘Great Britain’ to ‘Belgium’. The two obligations were distinct; and confused thinking is the inevitable penalty of failure to distinguish between them.</p>
<p class="para">Curiously enough, this distinction seems to present more difficulty to the philosopher than to the ordinary man, who readily distinguishes between the obligation of the individual to the state, and the obligation of the state to another state. In 1935, the Opposition in the House of Commons denounced the Hoare-Laval Plan as ‘a terrible crime’. But it did not denounce Sir S. Hoare as a criminal or regard him as such; it found him guilty only of an error of judgement. In 1938, some Englishmen felt ‘ashamed’ of the Munich Agreement. They were not ‘ashamed’ of themselves; for they would have done anything in their power to prevent it. They were not ‘ashamed’ of Mr Chamberlain; for most of them admitted that he had acted honestly, though mistakenly, and one does not feel ‘ashamed’ of anyone who commits an honest mistake. They were ‘ashamed’ of ‘Great Britain’, whose reputation had, in their view, been lowered by a cowardly and unworthy act. In both these cases, the same act which (in the view of the critics) represented an intellectual failure on the part of the individual represented a moral failure on the part of ‘Great Britain’. The <span class="italic">mot</span> became current that the British loan of £10,000,000 to Czecho-Slovakia was ‘conscience money’. The essence of ‘conscience money’ is that it is paid by a moral delinquent; and the moral delinquent who paid the £10,000,000 was not Mr Chamberlain, and not those individual Englishmen who had applauded the Munich Agreement, but <a id="page_139"></a>‘Great Britain’. The obligation of the state cannot be identified with the obligation of any individual or individuals; and it is the obligations of states which are the subject of international morality.</p>
<p class="para">Two objections are commonly raised to this view.</p>
<p class="para">The first is that the personification of the state encourages the exaltation of the state at the expense of the individual. This objection, though it accounts for the disfavour into which the personification of the state has fallen among liberal thinkers, is trivial. The personification of the state is a tool; and to decry it on the ground of the use to which it is sometimes put is no more intelligent than to abuse a tool for killing a man. The tool can equally well be put to liberal uses through emphasis on the duty of the state both to the individual and to other states. Nor can democracy altogether dispense with personification as a means to emphasize the duty of the individual. The most sophisticated of us would probably shrink from paying taxes to a group of individual fellow-citizens, though we pay them with comparative alacrity to a personified state. The same applies with greater force to graver sacrifices. ‘You would never have got young men to sacrifice themselves for so unlucky a country as Ireland,’ said Parnell, ‘only that they pictured her as a woman.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn6" id="ch09_fn6">6</a> ‘Who dies if England live?’ is not adequately paraphrased by ‘Who dies if other Englishmen live?’ Moreover, it is difficult to see how orderly international relations can be conducted at all unless Englishmen, Frenchmen and Germans believe (however absurd the belief may be) that ‘Great Britain’, ‘France’ and ‘Germany’ have moral duties to one another and a reputation to be enhanced by performing those duties. The spirit of international relations seems more likely to be improved by stimulating this belief than by decrying it. In any case, it is clear that human society will have to undergo a material change before it discovers some other equally convenient fiction to replace the personification of the political unit.</p>
<p class="para">The second objection is more serious. If international morality is the morality of fictitious entities, is it not itself fictitious and unreal? We can at once accept the view that moral behaviour can only proceed from individuals. To deny that ‘relations between Great Britain and Italy’ means the same as ‘relations between Englishmen and Italians’ is not to deny that ‘relations between Great Britain and Italy’ depend on the actions of individual Englishmen and Italians. The moral behaviour of the state is a hypothesis; but we need not regard as ‘unreal’ a hypothesis which is accepted in certain contexts as a guide to individual behaviour and does in fact influence that behaviour. So long as statesmen, and others who influence the conduct of international affairs, agree in thinking that the state has duties, and allow this view to guide their action, the hypothesis remains effective. The acts with which international morality is concerned <a id="page_140"></a>are performed by individuals not on their own behalf, but on behalf of those fictitious group persons ‘Great Britain’ and ‘Italy’, and the morality in question is the morality attributed to those ‘persons’. Any useful examination of international morality must start from recognition of this fact.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head2">Theories of international morality</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Before we consider the moral assumptions which underlie current thinking about international affairs, we must take some account of current theories of international morality. For though it is the assumptions of the ordinary man, not the assumptions of the philosopher, which determine the accepted moral code and govern moral behaviour, the theories of philosophers also exercise an influence on the thought (and, less frequently, on the action) of the ordinary man, and cannot be left altogether out of the picture. Theories of international morality tend to fall into two categories. Realists – and, as we have seen, some who are not realists – hold that relations between states are governed solely by power and that morality plays no part in them. The opposite theory, propounded by most utopian writers, is that the same code of morality is applicable to individuals and to states.</p>
<p class="para">The realist view that no ethical standards are applicable to relations between states can be traced from Machiavelli through Spinoza and Hobbes to Hegel, in whom it found its most finished and thorough-going expression. For Hegel, states are completely and morally self-sufficient entities; and relations between them express only the concordance or conflict of independent wills not united by any mutual obligation. The converse view that the same standard is applicable to individuals and to states was implicit in the original conception of the personification of the state and has found frequent expression not only in the writings of philosophers, but in the utterances of statesmen of utopian inclinations. ‘The moral law was not written for men alone in their individual character,’ said Bright in a speech on foreign policy in 1858, ‘. . . it was written as well for nations.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn7" id="ch09_fn7">7</a> ‘We are at the beginning of an age’, said Woodrow Wilson in his address to Congress on the declaration of war in 1917, ‘in which it will be insisted that the same standards of conduct and of responsibility for wrong shall be observed among nations and their governments that are observed among the individual citizens of civilized states.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn8" id="ch09_fn8">8</a> And when in July 1918 the faithful House tried his hand at the first draft of a League of Nations, Article I ran as follows:</p>
<p class="extract">The same standards of honour and ethics shall prevail internationally and in affairs of nations as in other matters. The agreement or promise of a power shall be inviolate.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn9" id="ch09_fn9">9</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent"><a id="page_141"></a>No corresponding pronouncement was included in the Covenant. But Dr Benes at one of the early Assemblies remarked that the League was <span class="italic">‘ipso facto</span> an attempt to introduce into international relationships the principles and methods employed . . . in the mutual relations of private individuals’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn10" id="ch09_fn10">10</a> In his famous Chicago speech of 5 October 1937, President Roosevelt declared that ‘national morality is as vital as private morality’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn11" id="ch09_fn11">11</a> But he did not specifically identify them.</p>
<p class="para">Neither the realist view that no moral obligations are binding on states, nor the utopian view that states are subject to the same moral obligations as individuals, corresponds to the assumptions of the ordinary man about international morality. Our task is now to examine these assumptions.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head3">Ordinary assumptions about international morality</p>
<p class="NoIndent">It is noteworthy that the attempt to deny the relevance of ethical standards to international relations has been made almost exclusively by the philosopher, not by the statesman or the man in the street. Some recognition of an obligation to our fellow-men as such seems implicit in our conception of civilization; and the idea of certain obligations automatically incumbent on civilized men has given birth to the idea of similar (though not necessarily identical) obligations incumbent on civilized nations. A state which does not conform to certain standards of behaviour towards its own citizens and, more particularly, towards foreigners will be branded as ‘uncivilized’. Even Hitler in one of his speeches declined to conclude a pact with Lithuania ‘because we cannot enter into political treaties with a state which disregards the most primitive laws of human society’;<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn12" id="ch09_fn12">12</a> and he frequently alleged the immorality of Bolshevism as a reason for excluding Soviet Russia from the family of nations. All agree that there is an international moral code binding on states. One of the most important and most clearly recognized items in this code is the obligation not to inflict <span class="italic">unnecessary</span> death or suffering on other human beings, i.e. death or suffering not necessary for the attainment of some higher purpose which is held, rightly or wrongly, to justify a derogation from the general obligation. This is the foundation of most of the rules of war, the earliest and most developed chapter of international law; and these rules were generally observed in so far as they did not impede the effective conduct of military operations.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn13" id="ch09_fn13">13</a> A similar humanitarian motive inspired international conventions for the protection of the ‘backward races’ or of national minorities, and for the relief of refugees.</p>
<p class="para">The obligations so far mentioned have been obligations of the state to individuals. But the obligation of state to state is also clearly recognized. The number of synonyms current in international practice for what used <a id="page_142"></a>to be called ‘the comity of nations’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn14" id="ch09_fn14">14</a> shows the persistence of the belief that states are members of a comity and have obligations as such. A new state on becoming, in virtue of recognition by other Powers, a member of the international community, is assumed to regard itself as automatically bound, without any express stipulation, by the accepted rules of international law and canons of international morality. As we have seen, the concept of internationalism was so freely used between the two wars for the purpose of justifying the ascendancy of the satisfied Powers that it fell into some disrepute with the dissatisfied Powers. But this natural reaction was not a denial of the existence of an international community so much as a protest against exclusion from the privileges of membership. The result of the Versailles Treaty, wrote Dr Goebbels, was ‘to expel Germany from the comity of powerful political countries’, and the function of National Socialism was to ‘unite the people and once more lead it back to its rightful place in the comity of nations’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn15" id="ch09_fn15">15</a> During Hitler’s visit to Rome in May 1938, Mussolini declared that the common aim of Italy and Germany was ‘to seek between them and with others a regime of international comity which may restore equally for all more effective guarantees of justice, security and peace’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn16" id="ch09_fn16">16</a> Constant appeals were made by both these Powers to the injustice of the conditions imposed on them in the past and the justice of demands now made by them; and many people in these countries were beyond doubt sincerely and passionately concerned to justify their policy in the light of universal standards of international morality.</p>
<p class="para">In particular, the theory that, since states have no moral obligations towards one another, treaties have no binding force, is not held even by those statesmen who exhibit least taste for international co-operation. Every state concludes treaties in the expectation that they will be observed; and states which violate treaties either deny that they have done so, or else defend the violation by argument designed to show that it was legally or morally justified. The Soviet Government in the first years of its existence openly violated not only treaties signed by previous Russian governments, but the treaty which it had itself signed at Brest-Litovsk, and propounded a philosophy which seemed to deny international obligation and international morality. But it simultaneously concluded, and offered to conclude, other treaties with the manifest intention of observing them and expecting others to observe them. The German Government accompanied its violation of the Locarno Treaty in 1936 with an offer to enter into a fresh treaty. In neither case is it necessary to doubt the sincerity of the government concerned. Violation of treaties, even when frequently practised, is felt to be something exceptional requiring special justification. The general sense of obligation remains.</p>
<p class="para"><a id="page_143"></a>The view that the same ethical standard is applicable to the behaviour of states as to that of individuals is, however, just as far from current belief as the view that no standard at all applies to states. The fact is that most people, while believing that states ought to act morally, do not expect of them the same kind of moral behaviour which they expect of themselves and one another.</p>
<p class="para">Many utopian thinkers have been so puzzled by this phenomenon that they have refused to recognize it. Others have sincerely confessed their bewilderment. ‘Men’s morals are paralysed when it comes to international conduct,’ observes Professor Dewey;<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn17" id="ch09_fn17">17</a> and Professor Zimmern detects a ‘rooted prejudice against law and order in the international domain’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn18" id="ch09_fn18">18</a> The discrepancy is less surprising than it appears at first sight. Casuists have long been familiar with the problem of incompatibilities between personal, professional and commercial morality. International morality is another category with standards which are in part peculiar to itself. Some of the problems of state morality are common to the whole field of the morality of group persons. Others are peculiar to the state in virtue of its position as the supreme holder of political power. The analogy between the state and other group persons is therefore useful, but not decisive.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head4">Differences between individual and state morality</p>
<p class="NoIndent">We may now turn to the principal reasons why states are not ordinarily expected to observe the same standards of morality as individuals.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent">(1) There is the initial difficulty of ascribing to the state, or to any other group person, love, hate, jealousy and other intimate emotions which play a large part in individual morality. It seems plainly incongruous to say, as an eighteenth-century writer said, that ‘a nation must love other nations as itself’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn19" id="ch09_fn19">19</a> For this reason, it is sometimes argued that the morality of the state must be confined to that formal kind of morality which can be codified in a set of rules and approximates to law, and that it cannot include such essentially personal qualities as altruism, generosity and compassion, whose obligations can never be precisely and rigidly defined. The state, like a public corporation, can – it is commonly said – be just, but not generous. This does not seem to be entirely true. We have already noted that group persons are commonly assumed to have moral as well as legal rights and obligations. When a bank or a public company subscribes to a Lord Mayor’s Fund for assistance to victims of some great disaster, the act of generosity must be attributed not to the directors, whose pockets are not affected, and not to the shareholders, who are neither consulted nor informed, but to the bank or company itself. When the Treasury makes a ‘compassionate grant’ <a id="page_144"></a>in some case of hardship, the act of compassion is performed not by the official who takes the decision, and not by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his individual capacity, but by the state. Some people expected ‘the United States’ to remit the debts owing to them from European states after the first world war, and criticized their refusal to do so on moral grounds. In other words, paradoxical as it may appear, we do, in certain circumstances, expect states and other group persons, not merely to comply with their formal obligations, but to behave generously and compassionately. And it is precisely this expectation which produces moral behaviour on behalf of a fictitious entity like a bank or a state. Banks subscribe to charitable funds and states make compassionate grants because public opinion expects it of them. The moral impulse may be traced back to individuals. But the moral act is the act of the group person.</p>
<p class="para">Nevertheless, while most people accept the hypothesis that group persons have in certain conditions a moral duty to act altruistically as well as justly, the duty of the group person appears by common consent to be more limited by self-interest than the duty of the individual. In theory, the individual who sacrifices his interests or even his life for the good of others is morally praiseworthy, though this duty might be limited by duty to family or dependents. The group person is not commonly expected to indulge in altruism at the cost of any serious sacrifice of its interests. A bank or public company which failed to pay dividends owing to generous contributions to charities would probably be thought worthy of censure rather than praise. In his presidential campaign of 1932, Franklin Roosevelt referred tauntingly to Mr Hoover’s reputation for humanitarian activities in Europe, and invited him to ‘turn his eyes from his so-called “backward and crippled countries” to the great and stricken markets of Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, Wisconsin and other agricultural states’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn20" id="ch09_fn20">20</a> It is not the ordinarily accepted moral duty of a state to lower the standard of living of its citizens by throwing open its frontiers to an unlimited number of foreign refugees, though it may be its duty to admit as large a number as is compatible with the interests of its own people. British supporters of the League of Nations who urged Great Britain to render assistance to victims of ‘aggression’ did not maintain that she should do this even to the detriment of her vital interests; they argued that she should render the assistance which she could reasonably afford<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn21" id="ch09_fn21">21</a> (just as a bank can reasonably afford to give 500 guineas to the victims of an earthquake). The accepted standard of international morality in regard to the altruistic virtues appears to be that a state should indulge in them in so far as this is not seriously incompatible with its more important interests. The result is that secure and wealthy groups can better afford to behave altruistically than groups which are continually preoccupied with the <a id="page_145"></a>problem of their own security and solvency; and this circumstance provides such basis as there is for the assumption commonly made by Englishmen and Americans that the policies of their countries are morally more enlightened than those of other countries.</p>
<p class="para">(2) It is, however, not merely true that the ordinary man does not demand from the group person certain kinds of moral behaviour which are demanded from the individual; he expects from the group person certain kinds of behaviour which he would definitely regard as immoral in the individual. The group is not only exempt from some of the moral obligations of the individual, but is definitely associated with pugnacity and self-assertion, which become positive virtues of the group person. The individual seeks strength through combination with others in the group; and his ‘devotion to his community always means the expression of a transferred egoism as well as of altruism’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn22" id="ch09_fn22">22</a> If he is strong, he converts the group to the pursuit of his own ends. If he is weak, he finds compensation for his own lack of power to assert himself in the vicarious self-assertion of the group. If we cannot win ourselves, we want our side to win. Loyalty to the group comes to be regarded as a cardinal virtue of the individual, and may require him to condone behaviour by the group person which he would condemn in himself. It becomes a moral duty to promote the welfare, and further the interests, of the group as a whole; and this duty tends to eclipse duty to a wider community. Acts which would be immoral in the individual may become virtue when performed on behalf of the group person. ‘If we were to do for ourselves what we are doing for Italy,’ said Cavour to D’Azeglio, ‘we should be great rogues.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn23" id="ch09_fn23">23</a> The same could truthfully have been said by many directors of public companies and promoters of good causes. ‘There is an increasing tendency among modern men’, writes Dr Niebuhr, ‘to imagine themselves ethical because they have delegated their vices to larger and larger groups.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn24" id="ch09_fn24">24</a> In the same way we delegate our animosities. It is easier for ‘England’ to hate ‘Germany’ than for individual Englishmen to hate individual Germans. It is easier to be anti-Semitic than to hate individual Jews. We condemn such emotions in ourselves as individuals, but indulge them without scruple in our capacity as members of a group.</p>
<p class="para">(3) These considerations apply in some measure to all group persons, though they apply with particular force to the state. There are, however, other respects in which we do not ordinarily demand from the state even the same standard of moral behaviour which we demand from other group persons. The state makes an altogether different kind of emotional appeal to its members from that of any other group person. It covers a far larger field of human activities, and demands from the individual a far more intensive loyalty and far graver sacrifices. The good of the state <a id="page_146"></a>comes more easily to be regarded as a moral end in itself. If we are asked to die for our country, we must at least be allowed to believe that our country’s good is the most important thing in the world. The state thus comes to be regarded as having a right of self-preservation which overrides moral obligation. In the <span class="italic">Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy</span> published after the war, Professor Holland Rose condones the ‘discreditable episode’ of the seizure of the Danish fleet at Copenhagen in 1807 on the ground of Canning’s belief that ‘the very existence of Great Britain was at stake’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn25" id="ch09_fn25">25</a> Those who take a different view commonly argue that Canning was mistaken, not that he should have acted otherwise if his belief had been correct.</p>
<p class="para">Other differences between the standards of morality commonly expected of the state and of other group persons arise from the fact that the state is the repository of political power and that there is no authority above the state capable of imposing moral behaviour on it, as a certain minimum of moral behaviour is imposed on other group persons by the state. One corollary of this is that we are bound to concede to the state a right of self-help in remedying its just grievances. Another corollary is the difficulty of securing the observance by all of a common standard; for while some moral obligations are always thought of as absolute, there is a strong tendency to make the imperativeness of moral obligations dependent on a reasonable expectation of the performance of the same duty by others. Conventions play an important part in all morality; and the essence of a convention is that it is binding so long as other people in fact abide by it. Barclays Bank or Imperial Chemicals Limited would incur moral censure if they employed secret agents to steal confidential documents from the safes of rival institutions, since such methods are not habitually employed by public companies against one another. But no stigma attaches to ‘Great Britain’ or ‘Germany’ for acting in this manner; for such practices are believed to be common to all the Great Powers, and a state which did not resort to them might find itself at a disadvantage. Spinoza argued that states would do likewise if it suited their interest.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn26" id="ch09_fn26">26</a> One reason why a higher standard of morality is not expected of states is because states in fact frequently fail to behave morally and because there are no means of compelling them to do so.</p>
<p class="para">(4) This brings us to the most fundamental difficulty which confronts us in our analysis of the moral obligations currently attributed to the state. It is commonly accepted that the morality of group persons can only be social morality (a state or a limited liability company cannot be a saint or a mystic); and social morality implies duty to fellow members of a community, whether that community be a family, a church, a club, a nation or humanity itself. ‘No individual can make a conscience for <a id="page_147"></a>himself,’ writes T. H. Green; ‘he always needs a society to make it for him.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn27" id="ch09_fn27">27</a> In what sense can we find a basis for international morality by positing a society of states?</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head5">Is there an international community?</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Those who deny the possibility of an international morality naturally contest the existence of an international community. The English Hegelian Bosanquet, who may be taken as a typical representative of this view, argues that ‘the nation state is the widest organization which has the common experience necessary to found a common life’,<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn28" id="ch09_fn28">28</a> and rejects with emphasis ‘the assumption that humanity is a real corporate being, an object of devotion and a guide to moral duty’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn29" id="ch09_fn29">29</a> The reply to this would appear to be that a corporate being is never ‘real’ except as a working hypothesis, and that whether a given corporate being is an object of devotion and a guide to moral duty is a question of fact which must be settled by observation and not by theory, and which may be answered differently at different times and places. It has already been shown that there is in fact a widespread assumption of the existence of a worldwide community of which states are the units and that the conception of the moral obligations of states is closely bound up with this assumption. There is a world community for <a id="page_148"></a>the reason (and for no other) that people talk, and within certain limits behave, as if there were a world community. There is a world community because, as Senor de Madariaga put it, ‘we have smuggled that truth into our store of spiritual thinking without preliminary discussion’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn30" id="ch09_fn30">30</a></p>
<p class="para">On the other hand, it would be a dangerous illusion to suppose that this hypothetical world community possesses the unity and coherence of communities of more limited size up to and including the state. If we examine the ways in which the world community falls short of this standard of coherence, we shall have a clue to the underlying reasons for the shortcomings of international morality. It falls short mainly in two ways: (i) the principle of equality between members of the community is not applied, and is indeed not easily applicable, in the world community, and (ii) the principle that the good of the whole takes precedence over the good of the part, which is a postulate of any fully integrated community, is not generally accepted.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head6">The principle of equality</p>
<p class="NoIndent">(i) The principle of equality within a community is difficult to define. Equality is never absolute, and may perhaps be defined as an absence of discrimination for reasons which are felt to be irrelevant. In Great Britain, the reasons for which some receive higher incomes or pay more taxes than others are (rightly or wrongly) felt to be relevant even by most of those in the less-favoured categories, and the principle of equality is not therefore infringed. But the principle would be infringed, and the community broken, if people with blue eyes were less favourably treated than people with brown, or people from Surrey than people from Hampshire. In many countries, minorities are discriminated against on grounds which they feel to be irrelevant, and these minorities cease to feel, and to be regarded, as members of the community.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn31" id="ch09_fn31">31</a></p>
<p class="para">In the international community such discrimination is endemic. It arises in the first place from the attitude of individuals. Gladstone is said on one occasion to have exhorted an audience of his fellow-countrymen to ‘remember that the sanctity of life in the villages of the Afghan mountains among the winter snows is no less inviolable in the eyes of the Almighty than your own’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn32" id="ch09_fn32">32</a> It may safely be said that the eyes of the Almighty are not in this respect those of the great majority of Englishmen. Most men’s sense of common interest and obligation is keener in respect of family and friends than in respect of others of their fellow-countrymen, and keener in respect of their fellow-countrymen than of other people. Family and friends form a ‘face-to-face’ group, between whom the sense of moral obligation is most likely to be strong. The members of a modern nation are enabled, through a more or less uniform education, a popular national press, broadcasting and travel facilities, and a skilful use of symbols,<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn33" id="ch09_fn33">33</a> to acquire something of the character of a ‘face-to-face’ group. The ordinary Englishman carries in his mind a generalized picture of the behaviour, daily life, thoughts and interests of other Englishmen, whereas he has no such picture at all of the Greek or the Lithuanian. Moreover, the vividness of his picture of ‘foreigners’ will commonly vary in relation to geographical, racial and linguistic proximity, so that the ordinary Englishman will be likely to feel that he has something, however slight, in common with the German or the Australian and nothing at all in common with the Chinese or the Turk.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn34" id="ch09_fn34">34</a> An American newspaper correspondent in Europe is said to have laid down the rule that an accident was worth reporting if it involved the death of one American, five Englishmen, or ten Europeans. We all apply, consciously or unconsciously, some such standard of relative values. ‘If it was not that China was so far away,’ said Neville Chamberlain in the House of Commons on the occasion of Japanese bombing of Chinese cities, ‘and that the scenes which were taking place there were so remote from our everyday consciousness, the sentiments of pity, horror and indignation which would be aroused by a full observation of those events might drive this people to courses which perhaps they had never yet contemplated.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn35" id="ch09_fn35">35</a> The same <span class="italic">motif</span> recurred in his national broadcast during <a id="page_149"></a>the Czecho-Slovak crisis on 27 September 1938; ‘How horrible, fantastic, incredible it is that we should be digging trenches and trying on gas-masks here because of a quarrel in a far-away country between people of whom we know nothing.’<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn36" id="ch09_fn36">36</a> These words were criticized in many quarters. But there is little doubt that they represented the initial reaction of the ordinary Englishman. Our normal attitude to foreigners is a complete negation of that absence of discrimination on irrelevant grounds which we have recognized as the principle of equality.</p>
<p class="para">This attitude of the individual is reflected in the attitude of states to one another; and the difficulty is intensified by the structure of the international community. Even if equality between individuals of different countries were recognized, the inequalities between states would be none the less flagrant. The existing inequalities among a handful of known states subject to no external control are infinitely more glaring, more permanent and more difficult to forget than inequalities between the anonymous mass of citizens subject, at any rate in name, to the same law. The importance attached to the idea of equality in international politics is shown by the number and insistence of the demands based on it. ‘Most-favoured-nation treatment’, the ‘Open Door’, ‘freedom of the seas’, the Japanese claim for the recognition of racial equality in the Covenant of the League of Nations, the old German claim to ‘a place in the sun’, the more recent German claim to <span class="italic">Gleichberecbtigung</span> or ‘equality of status’, have all been demands for the application of the principle of equality. The praises of equality were repeatedly sung in the Assemblies and Committees of the League of Nations – mainly, if not exclusively, by delegates of minor Powers.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn37" id="ch09_fn37">37</a> Yet there is little attempt at consistency in the use of the term. Sometimes it merely means formal equality of states before the law. In other contexts, it may mean equality of rights, or equality of opportunity or equality of possessions. Sometimes it seems to mean equality between Great Powers. When Hitler argued that ‘according to all common sense, logic and the general principles of high human justice . . . all peoples ought to have an equal share of the goods of the world’,<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn38" id="ch09_fn38">38</a> he hardly intended to convey that Lithuania ought to enjoy as much of ‘the goods of the world’ as Germany. Yet if we assume that equality of rights or privileges means proportionate, not absolute, equality, we are little advanced so long as there is no recognized criterion for determining the proportion. Nor would even this help us much. The trouble is not that Guatemala’s rights and privileges are only proportionately, not absolutely, equal to those of the United States, but that such rights and privileges as Guatemala has are enjoyed only by the good will of the United States. The constant intrusion, or potential intrusion, of power renders almost meaningless any conception of equality between members of the international community.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head7"><a id="page_150"></a>The good of the whole and the good of the part</p>
<p class="NoIndent">(ii) The other capital shortcoming of the international community is failure to secure general acceptance of the postulate that the good of the whole takes precedence over the good of the part. Great Britain possesses a common national consciousness because the man from Surrey will normally act on the assumption that the good of Great Britain is more important than the good of Surrey. One of the chief obstacles to the growth of a common German national consciousness was the difficulty in persuading Prussians, Saxons and Bavarians to treat the good of Germany as more important than the good of Prussia, Saxony and Bavaria. Now it is clear that, despite pious aspirations, people still hesitate to act on the belief that the good of the world at large is greater than the good of their own country. Loyalty to a world community is not yet powerful enough to create an international morality which will override vital national interests. Yet the conception of a community implies recognition of its good as something which its members are under an obligation to promote, and the conception of morality implies the recognition of principles of a universally binding character. If we refuse altogether to recognize the overriding claims of the whole, can any world community or any kind of international morality be said to exist at all?</p>
<p class="para">This is the fundamental dilemma of international morality. On the one hand, we find the almost universal recognition of an international morality involving a sense of obligation to an international community or to humanity as a whole. On the other hand, we find an almost equally universal reluctance to admit that, in this international community, the good of the part (i.e. our own country) can be less important than the good of the whole. This dilemma is, in practice, resolved in two different ways. The first is the method, which Hitler borrowed from the Darwinian school, of identifying the good of the whole with the good of the fittest. The fittest are by assumption ‘the <a id="page_151"></a>bearers of a higher ethic’;<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn39" id="ch09_fn39">39</a> and it is only necessary to prove in action that one’s country is the fittest in order to establish the identity of its good with the good of the whole. The other method is that of the neo-liberal doctrine of the harmony of interests, of which Woodrow Wilson, Lord Cecil and Professor Toynbee have been quoted as representatives. This doctrine, like every doctrine of a natural harmony of interests, identifies the good of the whole with the security of those in possession. When Woodrow Wilson declared that American principles were the principles of mankind, or Professor Toynbee that the security of the British Empire was ‘the supreme interest of the whole world’,<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fnst" id="ch09_fnst">*</a> they were in effect making the same claim made by Hitler that their countrymen are ‘the bearers of a higher ethic’; and the same result is produced of identifying the good of the whole international community with the good of that part of it in which we are particularly interested. Both these methods are equally fatal to any effective conception of international morality.</p>
<p class="para">There is no escape from the fundamental dilemma that every community, and every code of morality, postulates some recognition that the good of the part may have to be sacrificed to the good of the whole. The more explicitly we face this issue in the international community, the nearer we shall be to a solution of our problem. The analogy of the national community, though imperfect, is once more helpful. Modern liberalism, wrote Hobhouse shortly before 1914, ‘postulates, not that there is an actually existing harmony requiring nothing but prudence and judgement for its effective operation, but only that there is a possible ethical harmony to which . . . men might attain, and that in such attainment lies the social ideal’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn40" id="ch09_fn40">40</a> The word ‘ethical’ betrays the break in the argument. The nineteenth-century ‘harmony requiring nothing but prudence and judgement for its effective operation’ was a harmony of interests. The ‘ethical harmony’ is one achieved by the sacrifice of interests, which is necessary precisely because no natural harmony of interests exists. In the national community, appeals to self-sacrifice are constantly and successfully made, even when the sacrifice asked for is the sacrifice of life. But even in the national community, it would be erroneous to suppose that the so-called ‘harmony’ is established solely through voluntary self-sacrifice. The sacrifice required is frequently a forced one, and the ‘harmony’ is based on the realistic consideration that it is in the ‘interest’ of the individual to sacrifice voluntarily what would otherwise be taken from him by force. Harmony in the national order is achieved by this blend of morality and power.</p>
<p class="para">In the international order, the role of power is greater and that of morality less. When self-sacrifice is attributed to an individual, the sacrifice may or may not be purely voluntary. When self-sacrifice is attributed to a <a id="page_152"></a>state, the chances are greater that this alleged self-sacrifice will turn out on inspection to be a forced submission to a stronger power. Yet even in international relations, self-sacrifice is not altogether unknown. Many concessions made by Great Britain to the Dominions cannot be explained in terms either of British interests or of submission to the stronger. Concessions made by Great Britain to Germany in the nineteen-twenties, ineffective as they were, were dictated, not wholly by British interests or by fear of Germany’s strength, but by a belief in some conception of international morality which was independent of British interests. Any international moral order must rest on some hegemony of power. But this hegemony, like the supremacy of a ruling class within the state, is in itself a challenge to those who do not share it; and it must, if it is to survive, contain an element of give and take, of self-sacrifice on the part of those who have, which will render it tolerable to the other members of the world community. It is through this process of give and take, of willingness not to insist on all the prerogatives of power, that morality finds its surest foothold in international – and perhaps also in national – politics. It is, no doubt, useless to begin by expecting far-reaching sacrifices. The standard of what we can reasonably afford must not be pitched too high. But the course most detrimental to international morality is surely to pretend that the German people are the bearers of a higher ethic, or that American principles are the principles of humanity, or that the security of Great Britain is the supreme good of the world, so that no sacrifices at all by one’s own nation are in fact necessary. When Professor Zimmern urges ‘the ordinary man’ to ‘<span class="italic">enlarge</span> his vision so as to bear in mind that the <span class="italic">public affairs</span> of the twentieth century are <span class="italic">world affairs</span>’,<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn41" id="ch09_fn41">41</a> the most concrete meaning which can be given to this injunction is that the recognition of the principle of self-sacrifice, which is commonly supposed to stop short at the national frontier, should be extended beyond it. It is not certain that ordinary man will remain deaf to such an appeal. If the Chancellor of the Exchequer were to attempt to justify an increase in the income tax on the ground that it would make us better off, we should dismiss him as a humbug; and this is the kind of argument which is almost invariably used to justify any international policy involving apparent sacrifice of interests. A direct appeal to the need of self-sacrifice for a common good might sometimes prove more effective.</p>
<p class="para">But it is necessary to clear up a further point on which many illusions are current. In the national community, we assume that in this process of self-sacrifice and give and take the giving must come principally from those who profit most by the existing order. In the international community, the assumption is commonly made by statesmen and writers of the satisfied Powers that the process of give and take operates only within the existing order and that sacrifices should be made by all to maintain that order. International peace, said Mr Eden once, must be ‘based on an international order with the nations leagued together to preserve it’; and to this international peace ‘each nation makes its own contribution because it recognizes that therein lies its own enduring interest’.<a class="sup" href="#ch09-fn42" id="ch09_fn42">42</a> The fallacy latent in this and many similar pronouncements is fatal to any workable conception of international morality. The process of give and take must apply to challenges to the existing order. Those who profit most by that order can in the long run only hope to maintain it by making sufficient concessions to make it tolerable to those who profit by it least; and the responsibility for seeing that these changes take place as far <a id="page_153"></a>as possible in an orderly way rests as much on the defenders as on the challengers. This leads us to an examination of the problems of law and change in international politics.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch09-head8">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fnst" id="ch09-fnst">*</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See pp. 72, 74.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn1" id="ch09-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The Allied Governments in the Versailles Treaty attempted to revive this historic assumption by holding the ex-Kaiser personally responsible for acts of state; but the attempt was almost universally condemned as soon as passions began to cool. Modern dictatorships, however, helped to bring this conception back to fashion. Thus Professor Toynbee called the invasion of Abyssinia ‘Signor Mussolini’s deliberate personal sin’ (<span class="italic">Survey of International Affairs, 1935</span>, ii. p. 3), though he would probably have felt it incongruous to describe the Hoare–Laval Plan as the ‘personal sin’ of Sir S. Hoare or Laval.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn2" id="ch09-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Duguit, for example, calls it ‘valueless and meaningless anthropomorphism’ (<span class="italic">Traité de droit constitutionnel</span>, i. ch. v).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn3" id="ch09-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hall, <span class="italic">International Law</span> (8th ed.), p. 50; Pearce Higgins, <span class="italic">International Law and Relations</span>, p. 38.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn4" id="ch09-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">This does not, of course, mean that the state is a necessary form of political organization, but only that, so long as the state is the accepted form, its personification is a necessary fiction. The same would apply to any other form (e.g. the class). The personification of the proletariat has gone far in Soviet Russia (e.g. the fiction that it ‘owns’ the means of production).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn5" id="ch09-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">A striking example of confused thinking on this subject occurred in a recent letter to <span class="italic">The Times</span>. Commenting on the alleged British obligation to France in 1914, a distinguished professor of history wrote that ‘Grey may have regarded his personal honour as involved in support of France, but he certainly did not think that of the Cabinet was’ (<span class="italic">The Times</span>, 28 February 1939). The promise, if any, to support France must have been given by Grey not on his own behalf, but on behalf of Great Britain. Unless he believed that the whole Cabinet was under the same obligation as himself to see that Great Britain’s promise was honoured, he could not properly have given it at all.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn6" id="ch09-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in <span class="italic">Democracy and War</span>, ed. G. E. C. Catlin, p. 128.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn7" id="ch09-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">John Bright, <span class="italic">Speeches on Questions of Public Policy</span>, p. 479.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn8" id="ch09-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Public Papers of Woodrow Wilson: War and Peace</span>, i. p. II.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn9" id="ch09-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Intimate Papers of Colonel House</span>, ed. C. Seymour, iv. p. 28.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn10" id="ch09-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Fourth Assembly</span>, i. p. 144.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn11" id="ch09-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">International Conciliation</span>, No. 334, p. 713.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn12" id="ch09-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Speech in the Reichstag, 21 May 1935.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn13" id="ch09-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The rules of war have since 1914 been exposed to an exacting test. The distinction between combatant and non-combatant grows less and less. A deliberate attack on so-called non-combatants may in fact promote important military objectives; and the conception of <span class="italic">unnecessary</span> suffering, which the belligerent is not entitled to inflict because it is not essential to his military purpose, becomes more and more restricted and difficult to sustain. In short, modern conditions of warfare are doing much to break down, in one important point, a previously existing and effective sense of universal obligation.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_154"></a><a href="#ch09_fn14" id="ch09-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Half a dozen synonyms, used quite indiscriminately, are quoted from recent documents by Dr G. Schwarzenberger (<span class="italic">American Journal of International Law</span>, xxxiii. p. 59). There is no reason to suspect sarcasm in the reference, in a Japanese Imperial Rescript of 1933, to ‘the fraternity of nations’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn15" id="ch09-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Völkischer Beobachter</span>, 1 April 1939.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn16" id="ch09-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 9 May 1938.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn17" id="ch09-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, 15 March 1923, p. 95.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn18" id="ch09-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Zimmern, <span class="italic">Towards a National Policy</span>, p. 137.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn19" id="ch09-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Christian Wolff, quoted in H. Kraus, <span class="italic">Staatsethos</span>, p. 187.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn20" id="ch09-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Speech at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York, reported in the <span class="italic">New York Times</span>, 4 November 1932.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn21" id="ch09-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The League of Nations Union ‘advocates sanctions only in cases where the number and resources of the governments co-operating on the League’s behalf make it reasonably certain that the would-be aggressor will abandon his intention, so that war will not break out at all’ (<span class="italic">Headway</span>, December 1937, p. 232).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn22" id="ch09-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. Niebuhr, <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society</span>, p. 40.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn23" id="ch09-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in E. L. Woodward, <span class="italic">Three Studies in European Conservatism</span>, p. 297.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn24" id="ch09-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. Niebuhr, <span class="italic">Atlantic Monthly</span>, 1927, p. 639.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn25" id="ch09-fn25">25.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy</span>, i. pp. 363–4.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn26" id="ch09-fn26">26.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Spinoza, <span class="italic">Tractatus Politicus</span>, iii. § 14.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn27" id="ch09-fn27">27.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">T. H. Green, <span class="italic">Prolegomena to Ethics</span>, p. 351.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn28" id="ch09-fn28">28.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. Bosanquet, <span class="italic">The Philosophical Theory of the State</span>, p. 320.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn29" id="ch09-fn29">29.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. Bosanquet, <span class="italic">Social and International Ideals</span>, p. 292.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn30" id="ch09-fn30">30.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">S. de Madariaga, <span class="italic">The World’s Design</span>, p. 3.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn31" id="ch09-fn31">31.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It is only in recent times that there has begun to be even a presumption that all inhabitants of a territory are members of the community. Like Jews in Nazi Germany, the coloured inhabitants of the Union of South Africa are today not regarded as members of the community. In the United States, most white Southerners would hesitate to admit that the negroes are members of the community in the same sense as they are themselves.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn32" id="ch09-fn32">32.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted by the Delegate of Haiti in <span class="italic">League of Nations: Fifteenth Assembly</span>, 6th Committee, p. 43.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn33" id="ch09-fn33">33.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Moral attitudes always develop most sensitively in person-to-person relationships. That is one reason why more inclusive loyalties, naturally more abstract than immediate ones, lose some of their power over the human heart; and why a shrewd society attempts to restore that power by making a person the symbol of the community’ (R. Niebuhr, <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society</span>, pp. 52–3).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn34" id="ch09-fn34">34.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The variations of feeling are naturally also influenced by current political prejudices.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_155"></a><a href="#ch09_fn35" id="ch09-fn35">35.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 21 June 1938: <span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. 936. A correspondent in <span class="italic">The Times</span>, commenting on ‘the inconsistencies of compassion’ in the international sphere, enquires whether ‘the world’s conscience’ regards ‘100 dead or destitute Chinese as equivalent to one persecuted Jew’, or whether it is ‘simply that the Jews are near at hand, while the Chinese are a very long way away, and yellow at that’ (<span class="italic">The Times</span>, 25 November 1938).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn36" id="ch09-fn36">36.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">N. Chamberlain, <span class="italic">The Struggle for Peace</span>, p. 275.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn37" id="ch09-fn37">37.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Of the Great Powers only France, largely dependent for her position on the support of minor Powers, consistently advocated the principle of equality. ‘There is not, and we trust there never will be,’ said M. Blum on one occasion (<span class="italic">League of Nations: Sixteenth Assembly</span>, Part II, p. 28), ‘an order of precedence among the Powers forming the international community. Were a hierarchy of States to be established within the League of Nations . . . then the League would be ruined, both morally and materially’ – a remarkable statement in view of the hierarchical constitution of the Council.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn38" id="ch09-fn38">38.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Speech in the Reichstag of 28 April 1939.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn39" id="ch09-fn39">39.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 421.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn40" id="ch09-fn40">40.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">L. T. Hobhouse, <span class="italic">Liberalism</span>, p. 129.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn41" id="ch09-fn41">41.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Zimmern, <span class="italic">The Prospects of Civilisation</span>, p. 26.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><a id="page_156"></a><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch09_fn42" id="ch09-fn42">42.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Anthony Eden, <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>, p. 197.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>