<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_159"></a>CHAPTER TEN</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">The Foundations of Law</p>
<p class="NoIndent">No topic has been the subject of more confusion in contemporary thought about international problems than the relationship between politics and law. There is, among many people interested in international affairs, a strong inclination to treat law as something independent of, and ethically superior to, politics. ‘The moral force of law’ is contrasted with the implicitly immoral methods of politics. We are exhorted to establish ‘the rule of law’, to maintain ‘international law and order’ or to ‘defend international law’; and the assumption is made that, by so doing, we shall transfer our differences from the turbulent political atmosphere of self-interest to the purer, serener air of impartial justice. Before adhering to these popular conceptions, we must examine rather carefully the nature and function of law in the international community and its relation to international politics.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch10-head1">The nature of international law</p>
<p class="NoIndent">International law differs from the municipal law of modern states in being the law of an undeveloped and not fully integrated community. It lacks three institutions which are essential parts of any developed system of municipal law: a judicature, an executive and a legislature.</p>
<p class="para">(1) International law recognizes no court competent to give on any issue of law or fact decisions recognized as binding by the community as a whole. It has long been the habit of some states to make special agreements to submit particular disputes to an international court for judicial settlement. The Permanent Court of International Justice, set up under the Covenant of the League, represents an attempt to extend and generalize this habit. But the institution of the Court has not changed international law: it has merely created certain special obligations for states willing to accept them.</p>
<p class="para">(2) International law has no agents competent to enforce observance of the law. In certain cases, it does indeed recognize the right of an aggrieved party, where a breach of the law has occurred, to take reprisals against the offender. But this is the recognition of a right of self-help, not the enforcement <a id="page_160"></a>of a penalty by an agent of the law. The measures contemplated in Article 16 of the Covenant of the League, in so far as they can be regarded as punitive and not merely preventive, fall within this category.</p>
<p class="para">(3) Of the two main sources of law – custom and legislation – international law knows only the former, resembling in this respect the law of all primitive communities. To trace the stages by which a certain kind of action or behaviour, from being customary, comes to be recognized as obligatory on all members of the community is the task of the social psychologist rather than of the jurist. But it is by some such process that international law has come into being. In advanced communities, the other source of law – direct legislation – is more prolific, and could not possibly be dispensed with in any modern state. So serious does this lack of international legislation appear that, in the view of some authorities, states do on certain occasions constitute themselves a legislative body, and many multilateral agreements between states are in fact ‘lawmaking treaties’ (<span class="italic">traités-lois</span>).<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn1" id="ch10_fn1">1</a> This view is open to grave objections. A treaty, whatever its scope and content, lacks the essential quality of law: it is not automatically and unconditionally applicable to all members of the community whether they assent to it or not. Attempts have been made from time to time to embody customary international law in multilateral treaties between states. But the value of such attempts has been largely nullified by the fact that no treaty can bind a state which has not accepted it. The Hague Conventions of 1907 on the rules of war are sometimes treated as an example of international legislation. But these conventions were not only not binding on states which were not parties to them, but were not binding on the parties vis-a’ -vis states which were not parties. The Kellogg-Briand Pact is not, as is sometimes loosely said, a legislative act prohibiting war. It is an agreement between a large number of states ‘to renounce war as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another’. International agreements are contracts concluded by states with one another in their capacity as subjects of international law, and not laws created by states in the capacity of international legislators. International legislation does not yet exist.</p>
<p class="para">These shortcomings of international law, serious as they are, do not however deprive it of the title to be considered as law, of which it has all the essential characteristics. In particular, the relation of law to politics will be found to be the same in the international as in the national sphere.</p>
<p class="para">It has been observed that the fundamental question of political philosophy is why men allow themselves to be ruled. The corresponding question which lies at the root of jurisprudence is why men obey the law. Why is law regarded as binding? The answer cannot be obtained from the law itself any more than a proof of Euclid’s postulates can be obtained <a id="page_161"></a>from Euclid. Law proceeds on the assumption that the question has been satisfactorily disposed of. But it is a question which cannot be burked by those who seek to justify the ‘rule of law’. It applies to international as well as to municipal law. In international law, it sometimes takes the form of the question whether, and on what grounds, treaties are binding. The legal answer to this question is that treaties are binding in international law, which includes the rule (subject to some reservations which will be discussed presently) that treaties must be kept. But what the questioner probably means to ask is: Why is international law, and with it the rule that treaties must be kept, binding, and should they be regarded as binding at all? These are not questions which can be answered by international law. It is the purpose of this chapter to enquire in what domain the answer to them should be sought, and what that answer should be.</p>
<p class="para">In approaching the problem of the ultimate authority of law, we shall find the same fundamental divergence which we have traced in the field of politics between utopians, who think in terms of ethics, and realists, who think in terms of power. Among students of law, the utopians are commonly known as ‘naturalists’, who find the authority of law in natural law, and the realists as ‘positivists’, who find the authority of law in the will of states. The terminology tends to become blurred and fluctuating. Some utopians purport to reject natural law, and adopt some other standard such as reason, utility, ‘objective right’,<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn2" id="ch10_fn2">2</a> ‘ultimate sense of right’,<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn3" id="ch10_fn3">3</a> or a ‘fundamental norm’. Conversely, some positivists such as Spinoza purport to accept natural law, but empty it of its meaning by virtually identifying it with the right of the stronger. Other positivists fly the colours of ‘the historical school of law’ or of ‘the economic interpretation of law’. But the fundamental divergence remains between those who regard law primarily as a branch of ethics, and those who regard it primarily as a vehicle of power.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch10-head2">The naturalist view of law</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The naturalist view of law, like the utopian view of politics, has a longer history behind it than the positivist or realist view. In primitive communities, law is bound up with religion and, until a fairly late stage of human development, always appears to emanate from a god or a divinely appointed lawgiver. The secular civilization of the Greeks divorced law from religion, but not from morality. Greek thinkers found in the conception of natural law a higher unwritten law from which man-made law derived its validity and by which it could be tested. The acceptance of Christianity by the Roman Empire restored divine authority. Natural law was for a time identified with divine law, and it was only at the Renaissance <a id="page_162"></a>that it resumed its independent role as a non-theological ethical standard. As we have seen, the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries revived in a new form the identification of natural law with reason. ‘Law in general’, says Montesquieu, ‘is human reason, inasmuch as it governs all the peoples of the earth.’<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn4" id="ch10_fn4">4</a> It was under these auspices that modern international law was created by Grotius and his successors to meet the needs of the new nation-states which had arisen on the ruins of the mediaeval world. International law was therefore by origin strongly utopian. This was necessary and inevitable. The new conventions which came more or less effectively to govern relations between states grew no doubt out of practical needs. But they could never have secured as wide an acceptance as they did if they had not been treated as binding in virtue of natural law and universal reason. But here we shall note the recurrence of a paradox which is also apparent in the political field. Where practice is least ethical, theory becomes most utopian. Owing to the more primitive state of development of the international community, morality plays a smaller effective role in the practice of international law than of municipal law. In theories of international law, utopia tends to predominate over reality to an extent unparalleled in other branches of jurisprudence. Moreover, this tendency is greatest at periods when anarchy is most prevalent in the practice of nations. During the nineteenth century, a comparatively orderly period in international affairs, international jurisprudence took on a realist complexion. Since 1919, natural law has resumed its sway, and theories of international law have become more markedly utopian than at any previous time.</p>
<p class="para">The modern view of natural law differs, however, in one important respect from the view which prevailed down to the end of the eighteenth century. Prior to that time, natural law had always been conceived as something essentially static, a fixed and eternal standard of right which must, in the nature of things, be the same yesterday, to-day and for ever. The historical tendency of nineteenth-century thought, which at first threatened to eclipse natural law altogether, gave it a new direction; and towards the end of the century there emerged the new conception of ‘natural law with a variable content’.<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn5" id="ch10_fn5">5</a> Natural law, in this interpretation, connotes no longer something external, fixed and invariable, but men’s innate feeling at any given time or place for what ‘just law’ ought to be. This revised definition of natural law helps us a little. It gets over the old crux that slavery was at one time thought to be sanctioned, and at another time to be prohibited, by natural law, or that private property is in some places regarded as a natural right and in other places as an infringement of natural right. We are now asked to treat law as binding because it is an emanation not of some eternal ethical principle, but of the ethical <a id="page_163"></a>principles of a given time and community. This is, at any rate, a part of the truth. The ethical character of the impulse which lies behind many rules of law, municipal and international, including the rule of international law that treaties should be kept, will not be denied by any reasonable person. The prevalence in most European languages of words which bestride the frontier between law and ethics betrays a widespread conviction of the close relationship between them.</p>
<p class="para">Nevertheless, this explanation why law is regarded as binding will turn out, on further examination, to be inadequate and in some degree misleading. The main crux about natural law is not that people differ from time to time and from place to place about what particular rules it prescribes (for this crux might be surmounted by the ‘variable’ theory), but that natural law (or reason or ‘objective right’ or any of its other substitutes) can be just as easily invoked to incite disobedience to the law as to justify obedience to it. Natural law has always had two aspects and two uses. It can be invoked by conservatives to justify the existing order, as when the rights of the rulers or the rights of property are alleged to rest on natural law. It can equally be invoked by revolutionaries to justify rebellion against the existing order. There is in natural law an anarchic element which is the direct antithesis of law. Theories of law which seek the ultimate authority of law in its ethical content can explain only why good laws (or laws regarded as good at a given time and place) are regarded as binding. Yet there is a fairly general consensus of opinion which regards as binding even laws recognized as bad; and it may be doubted whether any community could long survive in which such an opinion did not prevail. It is commonly admitted that there may be a right or duty to disobey a bad law. But in such cases, a conflict is recognized to exist between two duties; and it is generally felt that only the most exceptional circumstances justify a decision in favour of the duty to disobey. No theory of law seems adequate which explains that law is regarded as binding because it conforms to natural law or because it is good.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch10-head3">The realist view of law</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The positivist or realist view of law was first clearly and explicitly stated by Hobbes, who defined law as a command<span class="italic">: Ius est quod iussum est</span>. Law is thus divorced altogether from ethics. It may be oppressive or otherwise immoral. It is regarded as binding because there is an authority which enforces obedience to it. It is an expression of the will of the state, and is used by those who control the state as an instrument of coercion against those who oppose their power. The law is therefore the weapon of the stronger. That contradictory thinker Rousseau, who elsewhere treats law as the antithesis <a id="page_164"></a>of despotism, has recorded this view in emphatic terms: ‘The spirit of the laws of all countries is always to favour the strong against the weak and him that has against him that has not. This drawback is inevitable, and there are no exceptions to it.’<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn6" id="ch10_fn6">6</a> According to Marx, all law is a ‘law of inequality’.<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn7" id="ch10_fn7">7</a> The principal contribution of Marxism to the problem is its insistence on the relativity of law. Law reflects not any fixed ethical standard, but the policy and interests of the dominant group in a given state at a given period. Law, as Lenin puts it, is ‘the formulation, the registration of power relations’ and ‘an expression of the will of the ruling class’.<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn8" id="ch10_fn8">8</a> The realist view of the ultimate basis of law is well summed up by Professor Laski: ‘Legal rules are always seeking to accomplish an end deemed desirable by some group of men, and it is only by constant formulation of what that end is that we can obtain a realistic jurisprudence.’<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn9" id="ch10_fn9">9</a></p>
<p class="para">The realist answer to the question why law is regarded as binding contains, like the ‘naturalist’ answer, a part of the truth. Some people do in fact obey some laws because lawbreaking will bring them into unwelcome contact with the police and the courts. But no community could survive if most of its members were law-abiding only through an ever-present fear of punishment. As Laud says, ‘No laws can be binding if there be no conscience to them’;<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn10" id="ch10_fn10">10</a> and there is plenty of evidence of the difficulty of enforcing laws which seriously offend the conscience of the community or of any considerable part of it. Law is regarded as binding because it represents the sense of right of the community: it is an instrument of the common good. Law is regarded as binding because it is enforced by the strong arm of authority: it can be, and often is, oppressive. Both these answers are true; and both of them are only half-truths.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch10-head4">Law as a function of political society</p>
<p class="NoIndent">If then we wish to reconcile these contradictory and inadequate half-truths, and to find a single answer to the question why law is regarded as binding, we must seek it in the relationship of law to politics. Law is regarded as binding because, if it were not, political society could not exist and there could be no law. Law is not an abstraction. It ‘can only exist within a social framework…. Where there is law, there must be a society within which it is operative.’<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn11" id="ch10_fn11">11</a> We need not dwell on the old controversy whether, as the positivists held, the state creates law, or as the naturalists held, law creates the state. It is sufficient to say that no political society can exist without law, and that law cannot exist except in a political society.<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn12" id="ch10_fn12">12</a> The point has been clearly put by a contemporary German writer:</p>
<p class="extract">All law is always the expression of a community. Every legal community (<span class="italic">Rechtsgemeinschaft</span>) has a common view of law (<span class="italic">Recht</span>) <a id="page_165"></a>determined by its content. It is an impossible undertaking to seek to construct a legal community without such a common view, or to establish a legal community before a minimum common view about the content of the community’s law has been attained.<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn13" id="ch10_fn13">13</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Politics and law are indissolubly intertwined; for the relations of man to man in society which are the subject-matter of the one are the subjectmatter of the other. Law, like politics, is a meeting place for ethics and power.</p>
<p class="para">The same is true of international law, which can have no existence except in so far as there is an international community which, on the basis of a ‘minimum common view’, recognizes it as binding. International law is a function of the political community of nations. Its defects are due, not to any technical shortcomings, but to the embryonic character of the community in which it functions. Just as international morality is weaker than national morality, so international law is necessarily weaker and poorer in content than the municipal law of a highly organized modern state. The tiny number of states forming the international community creates the same special problem in law as in ethics. The evolution of general rules equally applicable to all, which is the basis of the ethical element in law, becomes extremely difficult. Rules, however general in form, will be constantly found to be aimed at a particular state or group of states; and for this reason, if for no other, the power element is more predominant and more obvious in international than in municipal law, whose subjects are a large body of anonymous individuals. The same consideration makes international law more frankly political than other branches of law.</p>
<p class="para">Once therefore it is understood that law is a function of a given political order, whose existence alone can make it binding, we can see the fallacy of the personification of law implicit in such popular phrases as ‘the rule of law’ or ‘the government of laws and not of men’. The man in the street tends to personify law as something which, whether he approves it or not, he recognizes as binding on him; and this personification is as natural for everyday purposes as the personification of the state. It is, nevertheless, dangerous to clear thinking. Law cannot be self-contained; for the obligation to obey it must always rest on something outside itself. It is neither self-creating nor self-applying. ‘There are men who govern,’ says a Chinese philosopher, ‘but there are no laws that govern.’<a class="sup" href="#ch10-fn14" id="ch10_fn14">14</a> When Hegel finds the embodiment of the highest moral good in the state, we are entitled to ask, What state? or, better, Whose state? When modern writers on international politics find the highest moral good in the rule of law, we are equally entitled to ask, What law? and Whose law? The law is not an <a id="page_166"></a>abstraction. It cannot be understood independently of the political foundation on which it rests and of the political interests which it serves.</p>
<p class="para">We shall also have no difficulty in detecting the fallacy in the common illusion that law is more moral than politics. A transaction, by becoming legal, does not become moral. To pay a workman less than a living wage is not any more moral because the wage is fixed in a contract signed by the workman and valid in law. The annexations of French territory by Germany in 1871 and of German territory by the Allies in 1919 may have been moral or immoral. But they are not made any more moral by the fact that they were registered in treaties signed by the defeated Powers and valid in international law. It is not in itself any more moral to deprive Jews of their property by a law to that effect than simply to send storm troopers to evict them. The laws of the Medes and Persians were probably not conspicuously moral. If the law is ‘always seeking to accomplish an end deemed desirable by some group of men’, the ethical character of the law is obviously conditioned by that end. Political action can be, and often is, invoked to remedy immoral or oppressive law. The peculiar quality of law which makes it a necessity in every political society resides not in its subject-matter, nor in its ethical content, but in its stability. Law gives to society that element of fixity and regularity and continuity without which no coherent life is possible. It is the fundamental basis of organized political society that the rights and duties of citizens in relation both to one another and to the state should be defined by law. Law which is uncertain in its interpretation or capricious in its application fails to fulfil its essential function.</p>
<p class="para">Stability and continuity are, however, not the only requisites of political life. Society cannot live by law alone, and law cannot be the supreme authority. The political arena is the scene of a more or less constant struggle between conservatives, who in a general way desire to maintain the existing legal situation, and radicals, who desire to change it in important respects; and conservatives, national and international, have the habit of posing as defenders of law and of decrying their opponents as assailants of it. In democracies, this struggle between conservatives and radicals is carried on openly in accordance with legal rules. But these rules are themselves the product of a pre-legal political agreement. Every system of law presupposes an initial political decision, whether explicit or implied, whether achieved by voting or by bargaining or by force, as to the authority entitled to make and unmake law. Behind all law there is this necessary political background. The ultimate authority of law derives from politics.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch10-head5"><a id="page_167"></a>Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn1" id="ch10-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The Carnegie Endowment has, for example, given the title <span class="italic">International Legislation</span> to a collection published under its auspices of ‘multipartite instruments of general interest’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn2" id="ch10-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Duguit, <span class="italic">Traité de droit constitutionnel</span>, i. p. 16.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn3" id="ch10-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Krabbe, <span class="italic">The Modern Idea of the State</span> (Engl. transl.), p. 110.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn4" id="ch10-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Montesquieu, <span class="italic">Esprit des Lois</span>, Book I. ch. iii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn5" id="ch10-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The phrase comes from Stammler, whose <span class="italic">Lehre von dem richtigen Recbte</span> (1902–7) has been translated into English under the title <span class="italic">The Theory of Justice</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn6" id="ch10-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Rousseau, <span class="italic">Émile</span>, Book IV.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn7" id="ch10-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Marx and Engels, <span class="italic">Works</span> (Russian ed.), xv. p. 272.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn8" id="ch10-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lenin, <span class="italic">Works</span> (2nd Russian ed.), xv. p. 330; xii, p. 288.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn9" id="ch10-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Representative Opinions of Mr Justice Holmes</span>, ed. Laski, Introduction.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn10" id="ch10-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Laud, Sermon IV, Works, i. p. 112.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn11" id="ch10-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Zimmern, <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, xvii. (January-February 1938), p. 12.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn12" id="ch10-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘We shall no longer ask whether the state is prior to law, or law is prior to the state. We shall regard them both as inherent functions of the common life which is inseparable from the idea of man. They will both be primordial facts: they will both have been given, as seeds or germs, coevally with man himself: they will both appear, as developed fruits, simultaneously with one another and in virtue of one another’ (Gierke, <span class="italic">Natural Law and the Theory of Society</span>, Engl. transl., p. 224).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn13" id="ch10-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">F. Berber, <span class="italic">Sicherbeit und Gerechtigkeit</span>, p. 145.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch10_fn14" id="ch10-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hsun-tze, quoted in Liang Chi-chao, <span class="italic">History of Chinese Political Thought</span>, p. 137. A perfect illustration of the confusion which results from treating law as something self-contained and self-applying may be found in a reported dictum of Mr Winston Churchill: ‘There must be the assurance that some august international tribunal shall be established which will uphold, enforce and itself obey the law’ (<span class="italic">Manchester Guardian</span>, 12 December 1938). If Mr Churchill had paused to ask who would establish the august tribunal, who would enforce its decisions, who would make the law and who would see that the tribunal obeyed it, the implications of this apparently simple proposition would have become apparent.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>