<div class="delete">

<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_207"></a>CHAPTER FOURTEEN</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">The Prospects of a New International Order</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch14-head1">The end of the old order</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Periods of crisis have been common in history. The characteristic feature of the crisis of the twenty years between 1919 and 1939 was the abrupt descent from the visionary hopes of the first decade to the grim despair of the second, from a utopia which took little account of the reality to a reality from which every element of utopia was rigorously excluded. The mirage of the nineteen-twenties was, as we now know, the belated reflexion of a century past beyond recall – the golden age of continuously expanding territories and markets, of a world policed by the self-assured and not too onerous British hegemony, of a coherent ‘Western’ civilization whose conflicts could be harmonized by a progressive extension of the area of common development and exploitation, of the easy assumptions that what was good for one was good for all and that what was economically right could not be morally wrong. The reality which had once given content to this utopia was already in decay before the nineteenth century had reached its end. The utopia of 1919 was hollow and without substance. It was without influence on the future because it no longer had any roots in the present.</p>
<p class="para">The first and most obvious tragedy of this utopia was its ignominious collapse, and the despair which this collapse brought with it. ‘The European masses realized for the first time’, said a writer before the second world war, ‘that existence in this society is governed not by rational and sensible, but by blind, irrational and demonic forces.’<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn1" id="ch14_fn1">1</a> It was no longer possible to rationalize international relations by pretending that what was good for Great Britain was also good for Yugoslavia and what was good for Germany was also good for Poland, so that international conflicts were merely the transient products of avoidable misunderstanding or curable ill-will. For more than a hundred years, the reality of conflict had been spirited out of sight by the political thinkers of Western civilization. The men of the nineteen-thirties returned shocked and bewildered to the world of nature. The brutalities which, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, were confined to dealings between civilized and uncivilized <a id="page_208"></a>peoples were turned by civilized peoples against one another. The relation of totalitarianism to the crisis was clearly one not of cause, but of effect. Totalitarianism was not the disease, but one of the symptoms. Wherever the crisis raged, traces of this symptom could be found.</p>
<p class="para">The second tragedy of the collapse of utopia, which proceeded from the first and further intensified it, was of a subtler kind. In the latter half of the nineteenth century, when the harmony of interests was already threatened by conflicts of increasing gravity, the rationality of the world was saved by a good stiff dose of Darwinism. The reality of conflict was admitted. But since conflict ended in the victory of the stronger, and the victory of the stronger was a condition of progress, honour was saved at the expense of the unfit. After 1919 only Fascists and Nazis clung openly to this outmoded device for rationalizing and moralizing international relations. But the Western countries resorted to an equally dubious and disastrous expedient. Smitten by the bankruptcy of the harmony of interests, and shocked by its Darwinian deviation, they attempted to build up a new international morality on the foundation, not of the right of the stronger, but of the right of those in possession. Like all utopias which are institutionalized, this utopia became the tool of vested interests and was of the <span class="italic">status quo</span>. It is a moot point whether the politicians and publicists of the satisfied Powers, who attempted to identify international morality with security, law and order and other time-honoured slogans of privileged groups, do not bear their share of responsibility for the disaster as well as the politicians and publicists of the dissatisfied Powers, who brutally denied the validity of an international morality so constituted. Both these attempts to moralize international relations necessarily failed. We can accept neither the Darwinian doctrine, which identifies the good of the whole with the good of the fittest and contemplates without repugnance the elimination of the unfit, nor the doctrine of a natural harmony of interests which has lost such foundation in reality as it once had, and which inevitably becomes a cloak for the vested interests of the privileged. Both these doctrines have become untenable as the basis of international morality. Their breakdown has left us with no ready solution of the problem of reconciling the good of the nation with the good of the world community; and international morality is in the melting-pot.</p>
<p class="para">In what direction can we look for a revival of international morality? It is, of course, possible that no such revival is in prospect and that the world is descending into one of those historical periods of retrogression and chaos in which the existing mould of society is riven asunder and from which new and familiar forms eventually emerge. If so, the experience is unlikely to be either brief or painless. Those who believe in world <a id="page_209"></a>revolution as a short cut to utopia are singularly blind to the lessons of history; and the number of those who hold this belief appears to have diminished in recent years. There is no more reason to assume that the path lies through world revolution than to take refuge in blank despair. Our task is to explore the ruins of our international order and discover on what fresh foundations we may hope to rebuild it; and like other political problems, this problem must be considered from the standpoint both of power and of morality.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch14-head2">Will the nation survive as the unit of power?</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Before considering the role of power in any new international order, we must first ask what will be the unit of power. The current form of international politics is due to the fact that the effective units are nation-states. The form of the future international order is closely bound up with the future of the group unit.</p>
<p class="para">The French Revolution, which inaugurated the period of history now drawing to its close, raised the issue of the rights of man. Its demand for equality was a demand for equality between individuals. In the nineteenth century, this demand was transformed into a demand for equality between social groups. Marx was right in perceiving that the individual in isolation could not be the effective unit in the struggle for human rights and human equality. But he was wrong in supposing that the ultimate unit was the social class, and in discounting the cohesive and comprehensive qualities of the national unit. The great European figures of the later nineteenth century were Disraeli and Bismarck, who strove to weld together the ‘two nations’ into one through the agencies of the social service state, popular education and imperialism, refuted the taunt that ‘the worker has no country’, and paved the way for ‘national labour’, ‘national socialism’ and even ‘national communism’. Before 1914 the demand for equality was already beginning in Western Europe to pass over from the issue of equality between classes to that of equality between nations. Italian writers had described Italy as a ‘proletarian’ nation, using the term in the sense of ‘under-privileged’. Germany demanded equality in the form of her place in the sun, which must, as Bernhardi said, be ‘fought for and won against a superior force of hostile interests and powers’.<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn2" id="ch14_fn2">2</a> In France, socialist and ex-socialist ministers appealed for industrial peace in the interests of national unity. Imperceptibly the struggle between classes was coming to seem, even to the workers themselves, less important than the struggle between nations. And the struggle for equality became, in accordance with the ordinary laws of political power, indistinguishable from the struggle for predominance.</p>
<p class="para"><a id="page_210"></a>This then is the basic reason for the overwhelming importance of international politics after 1919. The conflict between privileged and unprivileged, between the champions of an existing order and the revolutionaries, which was fought out in the nineteenth century within the national communities of Western Europe, was transferred by the twentieth century to the international community. The nation became, more than ever before, the supreme unit round which centre human demands for equality and human ambitions for predominance. Everywhere in Europe, national governments and one-party states made their appearance; and where party issues survived, they were thought of as something outmoded and deplorable – a blot on national unity which cried out to be erased. The inequality which threatened a world upheaval was not inequality between individuals, nor inequality between classes, but inequality between nations. ‘Just as inequality of wealth and opportunity between the classes often led to revolutions,’ said Mussolini, ‘so similar inequality between the nations is calculated, if not peaceably adjusted, to lead to explosions of a much graver character.’<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn3" id="ch14_fn3">3</a> The new harmony which was required was not (as the philosophers of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> assumed) a harmony between individuals, and not (as Marx assumed when he denied the possibility of its realization) a harmony between classes, but a harmony between nations. To-day we need not make the mistake, which Marx made about the social class, of treating the nation as the ultimate group unit of human society. We need not pause to argue whether it is the best or the worst kind of unit to serve as the focus of political power. But we are bound to ask ourselves whether, and if so by what, it is likely to be superseded. Speculation on this subject falls naturally into two questions:</p>
<table class="extractTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">(<span class="italic">a</span>)</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">Are the largest and most comprehensive units of political power in the world necessarily of a territorial character?</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="NoIndent">(<span class="italic">b</span>)</p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="NoIndent">If so, will they continue to take approximately the form of the contemporary nation-state?</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="NoIndent">The question whether the largest and most comprehensive power units must necessarily be territorial cannot receive a dogmatic answer applicable to all periods of history. At present, such units have a distinctively territorial form. It is easy to read past history as a gradual development leading up, with occasional relapses, to this consummation; and political power is probably never, even in the most primitive societies, entirely divorced from the possession of territory. Yet in many periods of history, of which the mediaeval is the most recent, power has been based ostensibly – and in part, really – on grounds other than those of territorial sovereignty. It was acceptance of the principle <span class="italic">cuius regio eius religio</span> which substituted the unit based on domicile for the unit based on religious allegiance, and thereby <a id="page_211"></a>laid the foundation of the modern nation-state. In no previous period of modern history have frontiers been so rigidly demarcated, or their character as barriers so ruthlessly enforced, as to-day; and in no period, as we have already seen, has it been apparently so impossible to organize and maintain any international form of power. Modern technique, military and economic, seems to have indissolubly welded together power and territory. It is difficult for contemporary man even to imagine a world in which political power would be organized on a basis not of territory, but of race, creed or class. Yet the enduring appeal of ideologies which transcend the limits of existing political units cannot be ignored. Few things are permanent in history; and it would be rash to assume that the territorial unit of power is one of them. Its abandonment in favour of some other form of organized group power would, however, be so revolutionary that little that holds true of international politics in the present period would apply to the new dispensation. International relations would be supplanted by a new set of group relationships.</p>
<p class="para">The question whether the territorial units of the future are likely to retain approximately their present form is one of more immediate practical importance. The problem of the optimum size of units – whether units of industrial or agricultural production or units of political and economic power – is one of the most puzzling and important of the present time; and the near future may well see striking developments. In the field of political power, two contrary tendencies may be observed.</p>
<p class="para">In one direction, there is a clearly marked trend towards integration and the formation of ever larger political and economic units. This trend set in in the latter part of the nineteenth century, and appears to have been closely connected with the growth of large-scale capitalism and industrialism, as well as with the improvement of means of communication and of the technical instruments of power. The first world war threw this development into conspicuous relief.</p>
<p class="extract">Sovereignty, that is freedom to make decisions of wide historical importance [wrote Naumann in his famous book published in 1915], is now concentrated at a very few places on the globe. The day is still distant when there shall be ‘one fold, one shepherd’, but the days are past when shepherds without number, lesser or greater, drove their flocks unrestrained over the pastures of Europe. The spirit of large-scale industry and of super-national organization has seized politics…This is in conformity with centralized military technique.<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn4" id="ch14_fn4">4</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The interlude of 1918, when nationalism momentarily resumed its disintegrating role, proved – at any rate in Europe – a dangerous fiasco. <a id="page_212"></a>The multiplication of economic units added disastrously to the problems of the postwar period. Naumann with his <span class="italic">Mittel-Europa</span> proved a surer prophet than Woodrow Wilson with his principle of self-determination. The victors of 1918 ‘lost the peace’ in Central Europe because they continued to pursue a principle of political and economic disintegration in an age which called for larger and larger units. The process of concentration still continued. The more autarky is regarded as the goal, the larger the units must become. The United States strengthened their hold over the American Continents. Great Britain created a ‘sterling <span class="italic">bloc</span>’ and laid the foundations of a closed economic system. Germany reconstituted <span class="italic">Mittel-Europa</span> and pressed forward into the Balkans. Soviet Russia developed its vast territories into a compact unit of industrial and agricultural production. Japan attempted the creation of a new unit of ‘Eastern Asia’ under Japanese domination. Such was the trend towards the concentration of political and economic power in the hands of six or seven highly organized units, round which lesser satellite units revolved without any appreciable independent motion of their own. On the other hand there is some evidence that, while technical, industrial and economic development within the last hundred years has dictated a progressive increase in the size of the effective political unit, there may be a size which cannot be exceeded without provoking a recrudescence of disintegrating tendencies. If any such law is at work, it is impossible to formulate it with any precision; and prolonged investigation would be necessary to throw any light on the conditions which govern the size of political and economic units. The issue is, however, perhaps likely to be more decisive than any other for the course of world history in the next few generations.</p>
<p class="para">One prediction may be made with some confidence. The concept of sovereignty is likely to become in the future even more blurred and indistinct than it is at present. The term was invented after the break-up of the mediaeval system to describe the independent character of the authority claimed and exercised by states which no longer recognized even the formal overlordship of the Empire. It was never more than a convenient label; and when distinctions began to be made between political, legal and economic sovereignty or between internal and external sovereignty, it was clear that the label had ceased to perform its proper function as a distinguishing mark for a single category of phenomena. Discussion of such questions as whether the British Dominions are ‘sovereign’ Powers, or in whom ‘sovereignty’ of the mandated territories is vested, reveals the growing confusion. Such discussions are either legal arguments on the question what powers the authorities in those areas are constitutionally entitled to exercise (in which case the use of the term ‘sovereignty’ gives little help), or else arguments of pure form on the <a id="page_213"></a>question whether it is convenient to use the label ‘sovereignty’ to describe situations which diverge to a greater or less extent from a common pattern. The concept of sovereignty becomes definitely misleading when, for instance, in a computation of the value of British colonial trade or British colonial investment, Egypt and Iraq are excluded on the ground that they are sovereign states. It is unlikely that the future units of power will take much account of formal sovereignty. There is no reason why each unit should not consist of groups of several formally sovereign states so long as the effective (but not necessarily the nominal) authority is exercised from a single centre. The effective group unit of the future will in all probability not be the unit formally recognized as such by international law. Any project of an international order which takes these formal units as its basis seems likely to prove unreal.</p>
<p class="para">It may be well to add at this point that group units in some form will certainly survive as repositories of political power, whatever form these units may take. Nationalism was one of the forces by which the seemingly irreconcilable clash of interest between classes within the national community was reconciled. There is no corresponding force which can be invoked to reconcile the now seemingly irreconcilable clash of interest between nations. It is profitless to imagine a hypothetical world in which men no longer organize themselves in groups for purposes of conflict; and the conflict cannot once more be transferred to a wider and more comprehensive field. As has often been observed, the international community cannot be organized against Mars. This is merely another aspect of the dilemma with which the collapse of the spacious conditions of nineteenth-century civilization has confronted us. It seems no longer possible to create an apparent harmony of interests at the expense of somebody else. The conflict can no longer be spirited away.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch14-head3">Power in the new international order</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Power is a necessary ingredient of every political order. Historically, every approach in the past to a world society has been the product of the ascendancy of a single Power. In the nineteenth century the British fleet not only guaranteed immunity from major wars, but policed the high seas and offered equal security to all; the London money market established a single currency standard for virtually the whole world; British commerce secured – it is true, in an imperfect and attenuated form – a widespread acceptance of the principle of free trade; and English became the <span class="italic">lingua franca</span> of four continents. These conditions, which were at once the product and the guarantee of British supremacy, created the illusion – and to some extent the reality – of a world society possessing interests and sympathies in <a id="page_214"></a>common. The working hypothesis of an international order was created by a superior power. The hypothesis has been destroyed by the decline, relative or absolute, of that power. The British fleet is no longer strong enough to prevent war; the London market can enforce a single currency standard only over a limited area; free trade has wholly broken down; and if the English language retains, and has increased, its ascendancy, this is due to the fact that it is shared by Great Britain with other important countries. By what power can the international order be restored?</p>
<p class="para">This question is likely to be answered by different nations in different ways. Most contemporary Englishmen are aware that the conditions which secured the overwhelming ascendancy of Great Britain in the nineteenth century no longer exist. But they sometimes console themselves with the dream that British supremacy, instead of passing altogether away, will be transmuted into the higher and more effective form of an ascendancy of the English-speaking peoples. The <span class="italic">pax Britannica</span> will be put into commission and become a <span class="italic">pax Anglo-Saxonica</span>, under which the British Dominions, standing halfway between the mother country and the United States, will be cunningly woven into a fabric of Anglo-American co-operation. This romantic idea goes back to the last years of the nineteenth century when Great Britain was already conscious of the growing burden of world supremacy, and when Cecil Rhodes had one of the first recorded visions of world empire based on an Anglo-American partnership. Oddly enough, it was an American Ambassador in London who, just before the war, gave the idea its most concrete expression. In 1913, Walter Hines Page proposed that President Wilson should visit London and conclude an Anglo-American alliance. ‘I think’, he added, ‘the world would take notice to whom it belongs and – be quiet.’<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn5" id="ch14_fn5">5</a> The Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 was a more or less conscious bid by Great Britain for an equal partnership with the United States in the management of the world. The hope was reiterated again and again, with the reserves and the caution dictated by American susceptibilities, by British statesmen between the two world wars.</p>
<p class="extract">I have always believed [said Lord Baldwin at the Albert Hall in May 1935] that the greatest security against war in any part of the world whatever, in Europe, in the East, anywhere, would be the close collaboration of the British Empire with the United States of America. The combined powers of the navies, the potential manpower, the immediate economic power of the combined blockade, and a refusal to trade or lend money would be a sanction that no power on earth however strong dare face. It may be a hundred years before that desirable end may be attained; it may never come to pass. But <a id="page_215"></a>sometimes we may have our dreams. I look forward to the future, and I see that union of forces for peace and justice in the world, and I cannot but think, even if men cannot advocate it openly yet, that some day and some time those who follow us may see it and know that the peace of the world is guaranteed by those who speak our tongue.<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn6" id="ch14_fn6">6</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The enormous growth of interest in Great Britain in everything relating to the United States shows what deep roots this ambition has struck in British hearts.</p>
<p class="para">On the other side of the Atlantic, the picture necessarily looks rather different. Instead of an old firm, anxious to renew its strength by taking young blood into partnership, we have here a young and untried nation, reliant on its own strength, but still uncertain how far that strength will carry it. The United States did not, until the turn of the century, stake out their claim for recognition as a Great Power. But it was not long before leading Americans were beginning to see visions of world supremacy.</p>
<p class="extract">My dream [said Woodrow Wilson in a speech on Independence Day, 1914] is that as the years go by and the world knows more and more of America, it…will turn to America for those moral inspirations which lie at the basis of all freedom, … and that America will come into the full light of day when all shall know that she puts human rights above all other rights, and that her flag is the flag not only of America, but of humanity.<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn7" id="ch14_fn7">7</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The dream proved prophetic. In 1918 world leadership was offered, by almost unanimous consent, to the United States. The fact that it was then declined does not prove that it may not be grasped at some future time. If historical precedents count for anything, a <span class="italic">pax Americana</span> imposed on a divided and weakened Europe would be an easier contingency to realize than a <span class="italic">pax Anglo-Saxonica</span> based on an equal partnership of English-speaking peoples. But we are here in the realm of speculation, where the serious student cannot do more than canvass guesses and possibilities.</p>
<p class="para">The necessary drawback about all conceptions of a world order depending on the ascendancy of a superior Power is that they ultimately involve recognition of the right of the strongest to assume world leadership. The <span class="italic">pax Romana</span> was the product of Roman imperialism, the <span class="italic">pax Britannica</span> of British imperialism. The ‘good neighbour’ policy of the United States in Latin America is not the antithesis, but the continuation and consequence of ‘Yankee imperialism’; for it is only the strongest who can both maintain their supremacy and remain ‘good neighbours’. There is no theoretical reason to refuse to other nations the right to aspire to world leadership.</p>
<p class="extract"><a id="page_216"></a>Whoever really desires in his heart the victory of the pacifist conception of the world [writes Hitler in <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>] must devote himself by every means to the conquest of the world by the Germans. … The pacifist, humanitarian idea will perhaps be excellent when the man superior to all others shall first have so conquered and subjugated the world that he becomes its sole master.<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn8" id="ch14_fn8">8</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The policy of Japan, as the Chinese delegate remarked at an Assembly of the League of Nations, was to establish a <span class="italic">pax Japonica</span> in the Far East.<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fn9" id="ch14_fn9">9</a> The Englishman or the American is entitled to resist such ambitions. But he cannot resist them on universal grounds which will appeal to the German or the Japanese. The conception of a <span class="italic">pax Germanica</span> or a <span class="italic">pax Japonica</span>, i.e. of a world order dominated by Germany or Japan, was a priori no more absurd and presumptuous than the conception of a <span class="italic">pax Britannica</span> would have seemed in the reign of Elizabeth or of a <span class="italic">pax Americana</span> in the days of Washington and Madison. The only reason why it would seem absurd for Nicaragua or Lithuania to aspire to world leadership is that, according to any reasonable prognostication, these countries will never be strong enough to have the slightest hope of attaining such an ambition. To attempt to ignore power as a decisive factor in every political situation is purely utopian. It is scarcely less utopian to imagine an international order built on a coalition of states, each striving to defend and assert its own interests. The new international order can be built only on a unit of power sufficiently coherent and sufficiently strong to maintain its ascendancy without being itself compelled to take sides in the rivalries of lesser units. Whatever moral issues may be involved, there is an issue of power which cannot be expressed in terms of morality.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch14-head4">Morality in the new international order</p>
<p class="NoIndent">If, however, it is utopian to ignore the element of power, it is an unreal kind of realism which ignores the element of morality in any world order. Just as within the state every government, though it needs power as a basis of its authority, also needs the moral basis of the consent of the governed, so an international order cannot be based on power alone, for the simple reason that mankind will in the long run always revolt against naked power. Any international order presupposes a substantial measure of general consent. We shall, indeed, condemn ourselves to disappointment if we exaggerate the role which morality is likely to play. The fatal dualism of politics will always keep considerations of morality entangled with considerations of power. We shall never arrive at a political order in which the grievances of the weak and the few receive the same prompt attention as the grievances <a id="page_217"></a>of the strong and the many. Power goes far to create the morality convenient to itself, and coercion is a fruitful source of consent. But when all these reserves have been made, it remains true that a new international order and a new international harmony can be built up only on the basis of an ascendancy which is generally accepted as tolerant and unoppressive or, at any rate, as preferable to any practicable alternative. To create these conditions is the moral task of the ascendant Power or Powers. The most effective moral argument which could be used in favour of a British or American, rather than a German or Japanese, hegemony of the world was that Great Britain and the United States, profiting by a long tradition and by some hard lessons in the past, have on the whole learned more successfully than Germany and Japan the capital importance of this task. Belief in the desirability of seeking the consent of the governed by methods other than those of coercion has in fact played a larger part in the British and American than in the German or Japanese administration of subject territories. Belief in the uses of conciliation even in dealing with those against whom it would have been easy to use force has in the past played a larger part in British and American than in German and Japanese foreign policy. That any moral superiority which this may betoken is mainly the product of long and secure enjoyment of superior power does not alter the fact, though this consideration may well affect the appeal of the argument to Germans and Japanese and expose British and Americans to the charge of self-righteousness when they invoke it.</p>
<p class="para">It is, however, useless to discuss these problems of power and morality in a nineteenth-century setting, as if some fortunate turn of the wheel could restore the old conditions and allow a reconstitution of the international order on something like the old lines. The real international crisis of the modern world is the final and irrevocable breakdown of the conditions which made the nineteenth-century order possible. The old order cannot be restored, and a drastic change of outlook is unavoidable. Those who seek international conciliation may study with advantage the conditions which have made the process of conciliation between social classes in some degree successful. Essential conditions of that process were that the reality of the conflict should be frankly recognized, and not dismissed as an illusion in the minds of wicked agitators; that the easy hypothesis of a natural harmony of interests, which a modicum of good will and common sense would suffice to maintain, should be consigned to oblivion; that what was morally desirable should not be identified with what was economically advantageous; and that economic interests should, if necessary, be sacrificed in order to resolve the conflict by the mitigation of inequalities. None of these conditions has yet been realized in the international community. Responsible British and American <a id="page_218"></a>statesmen still commonly speak as if there were a natural harmony of interests between the nations of the world which requires only good will and common sense for its maintenance, and which is being wilfully disturbed by wicked dictators. British and American economists still commonly assume that what is economically good for Great Britain or the United States is economically good for other countries and therefore morally desirable. Few people are yet willing to recognize that the conflict between classes cannot be resolved without real sacrifices, involving in all probability a substantial reduction of consumption by privileged groups and in privileged countries. There may be other obstacles to the establishment of a new international order. But failure to recognize the fundamental character of the conflict, and the radical nature of the measures necessary to meet it, is certainly one of them.</p>
<p class="para">Ultimately the best hope of progress towards international conciliation seems to lie along the path of economic reconstruction. Within the national community, necessity has carried us far towards the abandonment of economic advantage as the test of what is desirable. In nearly every country (and not least in the United States), large capital investments have been made in recent years, not for the economic purpose of earning profits, but for the social purpose of creating employment. For some time the prejudice of orthodox economists against this policy was strong enough to restrict it to half measures. In Soviet Russia, such prejudice was nonexistent from the outset. In the other totalitarian states, it rapidly disappeared. But elsewhere rearmament and war provided the first substantial cure for unemployment. The lesson will not be overlooked. A repetition of the crisis of 1930–33 will not be tolerated anywhere, for the simple reason that workers have learned that unemployment can be cured by a gigantic programme of economically unremunerative expenditure on armaments; and such expenditure would be equally effective from the standpoint of employment if it were devoted to some other economically unremunerative purpose such as the provision of free housing, free motor cars or free clothing. In the meanwhile we are moving rapidly everywhere towards the abolition or restriction of industrial profits. In the totalitarian countries this has now been virtually accomplished. In Great Britain, the assumption has long been made that to earn more than a limited rate of profit on the provision of essential public services is immoral. This assumption has now been extended to the armaments industry. Its extension to other industries is only a matter of time, and will be hastened by any crisis. The rearmament crisis of 1939, even if it had passed without war, would have produced everywhere changes in the social and industrial structure less revolutionary only than those produced by war itself. And the essence of this revolution is the abandonment of economic advantage as the test of policy. Employment has become more important <a id="page_219"></a>than profit, social stability than increased consumption, equitable distribution than maximum production.</p>
<p class="para">Internationally, this revolution complicates some problems and may help to solve others. So long as power wholly dominates international relations, the subordination of every other advantage to military necessity intensifies the crisis, and gives a foretaste of the totalitarian character of war itself. But once the issue of power is settled, and morality resumes its role, the situation is not without hope. Internationally as nationally, we cannot return to the pre-1939 world any more than we could return to the pre-war world in 1919. Frank acceptance of the subordination of economic advantage to social ends, and the recognition that what is economically good is not always morally good, must be extended from the national to the international sphere. The increasing elimination of the profit motive from the national economy should facilitate at any rate its partial elimination from foreign policy. After 1918, both the British and United States Governments granted to certain distressed countries ‘relief credits’, from which no economic return was ever seriously expected. Foreign loans for the purpose of stimulating production in export trades have been a familiar feature of postwar policy in many countries. Later extensions of this policy were dictated mainly by military considerations. But if the power crisis can be overcome, there can be no reason why it should not be extended for other purposes. The more we subsidize unproductive industries for political reasons, the more the provision of a rational employment supplants maximum profit as an aim of economic policy, the more we recognize the need of sacrificing economic advantage for social ends, the less difficult will it seem to realize that these social ends cannot be limited by a national frontier, and that British policy may have to take into account the welfare of Lille or Du sseldorf or Lodz as well as the welfare of Oldham or Jarrow. The broadening of our view of national policy should help to broaden our view of international policy; and as has been said in an earlier chapter,<a class="sup" href="#ch14-fnst" id="ch14_fnst">*</a> it is by no means certain that a direct appeal to the motive of sacrifice would always fail.</p>
<p class="para">This, too, is a utopia. But it stands more directly in the line of recent advance than visions of a world federation or blueprints of a more perfect League of Nations. Those elegant superstructures must wait until some progress has been made in digging the foundations.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch14-head5">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fnst" id="ch14-fnst">*</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See p. 152.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn1" id="ch14-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">P. Drucker, <span class="italic">The End of Economic Man</span>, p. 56.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn2" id="ch14-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bernhardi, <span class="italic">Germany and the Next War</span> (Engl. transl.), p. 81.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_220"></a><a href="#ch14_fn3" id="ch14-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 21 April 1939.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn4" id="ch14-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">F. Naumann, <span class="italic">Central Europe</span> (Engl. transl.), pp. 4–5.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn5" id="ch14-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. S. Baker, <span class="italic">Woodrow Wilson: Life and Letters</span>, v. p. 31.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn6" id="ch14-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 28 May 1935.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn7" id="ch14-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. S. Baker, <span class="italic">Woodrow Wilson and World Settlement</span>, i. p. 18.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn8" id="ch14-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 315.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch14_fn9" id="ch14-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Eighteenth Assembly</span>, p. 49.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>

<br class="end-page"/></div>