<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Emergence Of The Nieo Ideology</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <h1 id="ht0005" class="h1_title"><a id="page_ix"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0005">Acknowledgments</a></h1>

    <div class="text_indent">
      This book began as a doctoral dissertation in political science at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
      Hill. My advisor, Andrew Scott, both suggested the original idea and gave me help throughout my doctoral
      research. The other members of my dissertation committee, Enrique Baloyra, Claudio Cioffi-Revilla, Fredrico Gil,
      and Jeffrey Obler, provided me with detailed comments and suggestions. I also received suggestions and support
      from other graduate students working on dissertations in international relations at the same time, Bobby
      Childress, Tom Havener, Roseanne Lipe, and especially Doug Nelson. Paul Streeten and Margaret de Vries generously
      answered my initial naive questions about the workings of the Bretton Woods institutions. The documents
      librarians at the University of North Carolina and at Wesleyan University constantly found ways to make my
      research easier. Elizabeth Grover, the secret reason why so many of the political science faculty at the Johns
      Hopkins University write well, did much more than type my dissertation.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Ernst Haas, Jeffrey Hart, Stephen Krasner, Wentworth Ofuatey-Kodjoe, and two anonymous reviewers read and
      commented on my manuscript as I rewrote it. My senior colleague at Wellesley College, Linda Miller, gave me moral
      support throughout the process. The editors of <span class="underline">International Studies Quarterly</span>
      helped me refine arguments that appear in <a href="Ch02.xhtml#ht0009">chapters 1</a> and <a href="Ch03.xhtml#ht0017">2</a> as well as in an article in their journal, "What the Third World Wants: An
      Interpretation of the Development and Meaning of the NIEO Ideology," vol. 27 (March 1983): 54-76.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      My sister, Claire Wilhelm, and parents, Arthur and Florence Murphy, encouraged me throughout the whole project.
      JoAnne Yates, my wife, tried valiantly to give me some of her writing skills. She succeeded, instead, in giving
      me much more.
    </div>

    <div class="text_right">
      <span class="italic">Craig Murphy</span>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
