<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Emergence Of The Nieo Ideology</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <h1 id="ht0007" class="h1_title"><a id="page_1"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0007">Introduction: The
    Ideology's Role in the North-South Conflict</a></h1>

    <div class="quotes">
      <div class="text_noindent">
        . . . any talk of giving "cultural autonomy" to the smaller countries while transferring their right
        of regulating their economic affairs (within the limits imposed on all international intercourse) to some
        <span class="underline">laisser-faire</span> mechanisms of a larger area is nonsense. If we mean by
        "cultural autonomy" something more than the preservation of picturesque costumes and out-of-date
        traditions which delight the traveller, then we must realize that it cannot develop unless a certain economic
        environment is given.
      </div>

      <div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Κ. W. Rothschild, 1944
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="quotes">
      <div class="text_noindent">
        The complaint of the poor nations against the present state is not only that we are both poor in absolute and
        relative terms and in comparison with the rich nations. It is also that within the existing structures of
        economic interaction we must remain poor, and get relatively poorer, whatever we do . . . The demand for a New
        International Economic Order is a way of saying that the poor nations must be enabled to develop themselves
        according to their own interests, and to benefit from the efforts they make.
      </div>

      <div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Julius Κ. Nyerere, 1974(<a id="bck_fn0002" href="Ch01.xhtml#fn0002">1</a>)
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Between the end of the second world war and the beginning of the 1970s an originally obscure set of ideas became
      central to one of the most important modern global conflicts. In the 1940s these ideas reached print only rarely,
      for example when a relatively eclectic British economist like K. W. Rothschild decided to work out some of the
      less popular implications of Keynesian economic theory. By the 1970s scores of books and thousands of pages of
      documents advanced the same views. The obscure <a id="page_2"></a>notions of the forties had become the
      organizing ideology of the largest alliance of nations ever assembled. This book is a political history of that
      new ideology, the New International Economic Order (NIEO) ideology. It describes where the ideology came from and
      how it became a force in international relations.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Like some older economic ideologies influencing international relations -- mercantilism, laissez faire
      liberalism, Keynesian liberalism, and Leninism -- the NIEO ideology defines an ideal system of global economic
      relations. But the new ideology is not mercantilism; advocates of the new order support conscious international
      management of global economic relations. It is not Keynesian liberalism; the new ideology's supporters reject
      creation of international institutions with powers limited only by the rational dictates of economic science. And
      the new ideology is neither laissez faire liberalism nor Leninism; new order advocates reject the idea that a
      single type of domestic economy need be imposed worldwide before a just system of international economic
      relations can exist.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      One thing distinguishes the new order ideology from all of the older major ideologies that have influenced
      international economic relations: The new ideology is concerned with alliance politics. New order advocates
      explicitly attempt to enlist international institutions behind their program to structure the world economy.
      Their ideology governs the behavior of the alliance of third world nations within international organizations. As
      an alliance's political ideology, the new order beliefs resemble the "free world" doctrine of the
      United States and its allies and the "socialist" doctrine of the Soviet Union and its allies: All
      define positions taken in global political conflicts. The NIEO ideology underlies the proposals for a New
      International Economic Order made by the Group of 77 less developed countries (LDCs)(<a id="bck_fn0003" href="Ch01.xhtml#fn0003">2</a>) and their supporters. It is one part of the current north-south conflict's
      visible, ideological face.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In tracing the development of this ideology, I begin in the 1940s, when the current north-south conflict over how
      the global economy should be structured first appeared. To the extent that the world economy is structured by any
      conscious public decisions, three international economic management institutions established then have the most
      influence: the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
      (GATT). Each works alongside the agencies with trade, aid, and monetary powers that are parts of the governments
      of major developed market countries (DMCs). Not only were all three of these global organizations created in the
      1940s; the ideologies framing the current economic policies of most DMCs were invented or revitalized then.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Following current convention, throughout this book I <a id="page_3"></a>refer to the three international agencies
      and the national actions which support those agencies as "the Bretton Woods system," even though only
      the IMF and World Bank were negotiated at Bretton Woods. The GATT's legal status, organization, and
      operations also differ from those of the two other agencies. The IMF and the Bank, more than the GATT, are true
      international governmental organizations having their own chartered powers, their own staffs, and (at least
      potentially) their own independent operational ideologies. The GATT is a contract among states; it does not
      require the staff and autonomy of the other agencies. All three institutions, plus the agencies of the dominant
      governments that provide crucial support for the institutions' goals, can be considered together for
      analytical purposes because the creation of those international organizations was informed by the dominant
      ideology of the powerful nations.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the forties K. W. Rothschild characterized this dominant ideology as a desire for a weak global federation
      dedicated to laissez faire economics, a system where international management of the world economy would lead to
      free trade and free enterprise economies everywhere. This fundamental vision continues to inform many of the
      policies of the Bretton Woods institutions as well as many of the aid, trade, and monetary policies pursued by
      the major DMC governments. The dominant ideology's fundamental vision runs completely counter to a major
      theme that advocates of the NIEO reiterate constantly: their belief that the structure of the world economy
      should impose no economic principles (like laissez faire) upon nations. Rather, they believe that the
      international economy should be structured to help any nation achieve its development plans whatever the
      principles guiding that plan might be.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      We can understand why third world leaders talk about their "rights" to "develop themselves
      according to their own interests" by seeing the new order ideology as a response to the dominant ideology
      and the system of which it is a part. Recent references, like Nyerere's, to development rights based upon a
      more fundamental right of cultural autonomy just reiterate Rothschild's view, thirty years after the system
      he criticized was created.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In its simplest form, then, my thesis is that the New International Economic Order ideology developed as an
      understandable response to real problems experienced by third world states as a result of the Bretton Woods
      system's creation and operation. The analyses the new order advocates offer of the economic problems they
      face may or may not be the most accurate ones, and the policies they advocate many or may not be the best; I am
      offering an analysis of the ideology's development, not a critique of its validity or value. Therefore I do
      not use the word "ideology" as a pejorative. Most practical human consciousness, including most
      scientific thinking, is <a id="page_4"></a>just as "ideological." NIEO advocates simply countered one
      ideology with another.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      On one level, the development of the new order ideology looked like this: Each of the positions added to the
      developing ideology was adopted because it was the most satisfactory of all the available ways for new order
      advocates to understand a new, shared problem. While they sought the most accurate or "scientifically"
      correct of a set of ideas available for apprehending the new problem, that set was bounded by an
      "ideological constraint." This constraint ruled out any new ideas that contradicted any part of the
      previous new order consensus. Over time, under the ideological constraint of their prior consensus, the ideas
      third world governments adopted to apprehend and cope with their old and new problems under the Bretton Woods
      system became an ideology as comprehensive and coherent as the ideology that was part of the dominant system.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Together, the two ideologies constitute the ideological face of the current north-south conflict. That
      ideological conflict appears throughout statements made by the advocates of the new order and those made on
      similar topics by the people who want to continue the present system. On its face, the conflict is one between
      two specific conceptions of how international economic relations can and should be governed. The dominant
      ideology and the NIEO ideology both identify a proper realm for international, rational management of the world
      economy. The ideologies differ in the ways they define the boundaries of that realm, the main goals of such
      management activity, and the policies that should be employed.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The area of agreement between the two ideologies, between statements by DMC spokesmen about international
      economic matters and those made by third world spokesmen, tell us the current north-south conflict is ostensibly
      about the management of international economic relations. "Both north and south believe in conscious
      governmental intervention in the economy at the national and international levels. Adherents to both ideologies
      agree that governments and international organizations should have a role in setting economic goals and
      attempting to achieve those goals through policy. Moreover, both positions identify the international economic
      policy-making process as one that should be essentially rational? policy makers should analyze all variables that
      may influence a chosen goal, and they should choose policies to maximize that goal.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The differences between the two ideologies show up when we examine the limitations on the realm of rational
      economic policy making that each considers essential. The dominant ideology suggests that international economic
      policy making should never penetrate a realm of international economic relations defined by the entitle<a id="page_5"></a>ments and duties of private property ownership. Property owners must have the right to use their
      property in ways they see fit. They must be compensated when property is expropriated. Contracts must be
      enforced. The realm of property must be protected no matter how irrational private uses, policies of
      compensation, and the consequences of some contracts may be in terms of achieving international economic goals.
      In contrast, the new order ideology affirms that entitlements and duties associated with national sovereignty
      define the only proper limitations upon international economic policy making. Nations must have the right to use
      their geographically defined resources in any way they see fit, and national governments have the duty to respect
      and even foster the form of economic relations adopted by the governments of every other country despite
      irrational effects those policies may have on international economic goals.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The two ideologies also differ in terms of the specific concepts necessary for rational economic planning —
      goals, economic analysis, and ideas about policies that could achieve those goals in light of that analysis. The
      dominant ideology places maximization of the world's production of goods and services as its central and
      primary goal and considers subordinate goals -- such of encouraging world political cooperation, full employment,
      and economic security for individuals — as inevitable consequences of maximized production. The new order
      ideology also emphasizes production, peace, full employment, as well as some ecological goals, but it does not
      necessarily see them as correlated. Supporters of the new order emphasize trade-offs, yet say one goal,
      industrial development in the third world, should have the highest priority.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The two analyses of international economics differ even more when we look at the variables that are said to
      influence these goals. The NIEO ideology presents a picture of the world divided between economically central and
      economically peripheral countries in which the level of employment and level of production in the periphery are
      dependent on decisions made at the center. The dominant ideology presents a world of economic actors firms and
      individuals — that merely happen to be circumscribed by certain national laws; it argues that correctly perceived
      national interests never contradict free market policies. Consequently, the adherent to the dominant ideology
      calls for reciprocal concessions by all nations to make a world free market and prescribes ways that
      intergovernmental organizations should intervene in economic relations to make such concessions likely. New order
      advocates say that nonreciprocal policies allowing certain national restrictions on exchange are essential if we
      want to achieve the highest possible levels of production and welfare.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      While the differences between the ideologies are <a id="page_6"></a>great, they would be less important if
      advocates of both could agree upon a way to settle disputes about principles, goals, and analyses. The desire for
      rational economic management expressed by both ideologies provides one means to resolve disputed economic
      analysis: empirical scientific study. Yet both ideologies suggest additional, conflicting means to resolve
      intergovernmental economic disputes. Adherents to the dominant ideology say that conflicts over goals and
      analyses should be resolved by direct bargaining between national governments. Implicitly, they affirm that in
      such bargaining all elements of national power — diplomatic, economic, and military — should be allowed to come
      into play; therefore, the outcomes of such bargaining must be weighted toward the self-defined interests of the
      most powerful nations. The new order ideology says that binding decisions over disputed goals and analyses should
      be made by majority rule or consensus of national governments, each government having an equal voice to reflect
      its equal sovereignty. This conflict over the right way to resolve differences keeps the sides apart even when
      new events force them to amend their views. The north-south conflict has gone through many changes without being
      resolved.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      I organize my analysis around the five distinct phases in the north-south conflict:
    </div>

    <ul class="simple">
      <li class="calibre2">1944-59 before the Bretton Woods system began to operate the way it was designed to</li>

      <li class="calibre2">1959-64 after the system began to operate normally but before third world states made their alliance
      formal</li>

      <li class="calibre2">1964-71 while the system continued to operate normally and after the formal alliance</li>

      <li class="calibre2">1971-75 after the system began to break down but before third world adversaries provided opportunities for
      compromise</li>

      <li class="calibre2">1975 - after the first opportunities for compromise appeared</li>
    </ul>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      Andrew Scott's theory of managing international interdependence and David Apter's theory of stages in the
      development of domestic mobilizing ideologies in new nations(<a id="bck_fn0004" href="Ch01.xhtml#fn0004">3</a>) suggest these phases and accurately predict the innovations that occurred during each.
      The validity of these combined theories, in turn, supports the thesis that the NIEO ideology developed in
      response to the creation and operation of the Bretton Woods system.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Scott explains that the history of consciously created systems for structuring human relations, like the <a id="page_7"></a>Bretton Woods arrangements, can be described in three stages: formation, operation, and breakdown.
      To form the system, those who will be affected by the structure or regime must resolve conflicts over what
      relations should be governed and how that should be done. Some of the actors that will be affected by the regime
      may have doubts that are not resolved simply because they do not have the power to make their interests salient
      to others. Of course that would only happen if the regime-formation conflicts were resolved through direct
      bargaining, subjection, or some other process that takes all forms of power into account. The actors whose
      interests are not considered, therefore, have automatic grounds for grievances with the new regime. As Apter
      suggests, their grievances can provide them with the basis for a new shared moral code and a new, separate
      identity.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      My first chapter covers the long period during which the Bretton Woods system was formed, the 1940s and 1950s.
      Asian, African, and Latin American interests in postwar regimes that would foster economic development through
      coordinating national trade regulations were excluded from the postwar institutions. Those third world interests
      became the basis for principles, goals, and symbols of identity first adopted by third world governments in the
      forties and fifties, core elements of the new order ideology that they still reiterate today.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      As the Bretton Woods system became more and more of a reality, third world spokesmen began to offer analyses of
      the world economy that did more than reiterate their initial grievances with the Bretton Woods system. For
      example, in the fifties third world governments began to charge DMCs with manipulating the terms of trade for
      third world goods through cold war policies of stockpiling raw materials and through exceptions to GATT rules
      that DMCs granted to themselves in order to allow special trade alliances including the European Community.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Scott's theory of managed international interdependence explains why new problems occurred and how they were
      linked back to the Bretton Woods system itself. With his theory we can explain all of the new economic analysis
      the third world adopted as part of the new order ideology in the 1960s, the only decade during which the Bretton
      Woods system operated in anything close to the way its founders intended. Scott argues that even consciously
      managed interdependence regularly produces distressing results that no one ever intended. Most of the early
      unintended consequences of the operation of the Bretton Woods system could be ignored by the system's most
      important backers. At first the unexpected events only harmed the interests of the less developed countries that
      had never really backed the system anyway.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      <a href="Ch03.xhtml#ht0017">Chapter 2</a> covers the 1960s, the period when the Bretton Woods system
      operated most normally. This decade was marked by unintended results of growing international <a id="page_8"></a>economic interdependence that were harmful to third world nations but not to others. Ironically,
      partially as a result of the successes of the Bretton Wood system, the third world's share in world trade
      declined, differences in standards of living between third world and developed nations and among third world
      nations grew, some capital and skilled manpower left the third world, and transnational firms in the third world
      increased their influence over local economies. Throughout the sixties third world governments barely amended the
      principles and goals they had agreed upon previously. Yet they expanded the new order ideology's policy
      analysis rapidly as they adopted new ideas to apprehend and explain the new economic problems they encountered.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Apter's theory makes me divide this decade during which the Bretton Woods system functioned the most
      successfully into two phases of the north-south conflict. With his theory we can understand the one set
      ideological innovations in the sixties that Scott's ideas cannot clarify. Apter suggests that a conflict
      enters a new phase when aggrieved parties develop a new, collective political identity. The third phase in the
      emergence of the New International Economic Order ideology began halfway through the 1960s when the Group of 77
      formed. After that, the group confronted the political problem of making its ideology dominant. Throughout the
      late sixties the members of the alliance tested proposals for projecting what influence they had over DMCs. In
      the course of doing so the alliance added a political analysis to the economic analysis, principles, and goals
      which had previously made up the New International Economic Order ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      This third phase was far from smooth. Not all inter-third world dissent on global economic principles ended with
      the formation of the Group of 77. <a href="Ch04.xhtml#ht0022">Chapter 3</a> begins in 1970, after the
      third world governments had agreed upon the notion that a new international economic order should be formed, but
      while the third world alliance still remained divided between two groups, each advocating economic duties under
      the NIEO. Initially these differences were based upon the different interests of the recently independent third
      world nations, on the one hand, and older members of the group, on the other. The differences disappeared from
      official statements before the south presented the new order program at the General Assembly Special Session in
      1974. By that time all third world governments had consented to having the principles first adopted by the older
      group members in the forties as the single set of principles governing the duties of wealthy states to aid poorer
      ones. The key principle they affirmed was a permanent duty of all wealthy states to aid the economic development
      programs of poorer states. In contrast a historical duty based upon restitution for colonialism, advocated by the
      newer <a id="page_9"></a>states, never obtained a similarly central a position in the ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The bulk of <a href="Ch04.xhtml#ht0022">chapter 3</a> discusses the proximate cause of the most recent
      third world convergence upon this key principle, the first signs of the Bretton Woods system's breakdown, in
      1971. Extending Scott's argument, we can distinguish a period of breakdown in a regime as one that begins
      when the inadvertent consequences of management start to harm the actors whose support the regime needs. When the
      DMCs started to refuse obligations under Bretton Woods in the wake of global stagflation, mounting trade
      deficits, and approaching energy limits to growth, the fourth phase in the development of the New International
      Economic Order ideology began. Third world ideologists had something new to discuss after 1971, the attempts to
      reform the Bretton Woods system engineered by DMCs in the wake of the system's crises.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the time the new order ideology could be characterized by that Apter calls "hortatory
      realism."(<a id="bck_fn0005" href="Ch01.xhtml#fn0005">4</a>) That is, while the ideology certainly
      contained many objectively accurate propositions arrived at through attempts to correctly understand real
      problems, the ideology's primary function was to keep the alliance directed toward its fundamental goals. New
      order advocates were ideologically constrained to repeat all the untested propositions in their earliest
      consensus. They did so, in part, because no opponents had expressed enough sympathy with the ideology for NIEO
      advocates to begin the sort of dialogue that could bring some of their untested assumptions into question.
      Consequently, in the early seventies new order advocates tended to limit their innovations to adding analyses of
      ways to exploit the DMCs economic vulnerabilities that had been exposed as the Bretton Woods system started to
      break down.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In 1975 the north-south conflict entered a new political phase, the fifth phase in the development of the new
      order ideology. By then many of the major developed states had accepted some new order proposals as the agenda
      for further north-south discussions. According to Apter, such a development should allow the third world's
      economic and political realism to turn from being "hortatory" to being "practical" as
      opportunities for realistic compromise appear. The actual record since 1975 is mixed. Compromises between north
      and south have been reached, but, in the main, third world states continue to support goals and principles for a
      new order that is anathema to at least the most powerful DMCs. <a href="Ch05.xhtml#ht0029">Chapter 4</a>
      discusses the increasingly substantive new order debate in light of the few changes in the third world position
      since 1974.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      <a href="Ch06.xhtml#ht0035">Chapter 5</a> summarizes my conclusions about the origin of the new order
      ideology and then looks both at and below the level of the global system to find out why all third world
      governments, which differ so much one from <a id="page_10"></a>another, can share some underlying interests that
      the ideology helps them understand and pursue. Even a superficial global view of the ideology suggests how
      complex the network of interests supporting the new order might be. The new order ideology sanctions all the
      different development doctrines around the world, doctrines that differ enough to satisfy the scores of different
      domestic political coalitions of classes and sectoral groups backing different third world governments. <a href="Ch06.xhtml#ht0035">Chapter 5</a>'s analysis of the new order ideology as ideology suggests some
      simple patterns underlying the apparent complexity of domestic interests in the south. It also discusses how
      common individual experiences of members of the third world elite contributed to the ideology's development.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Both <a href="Ch05.xhtml#ht0029">chapters 4</a> and <a href="Ch06.xhtml#ht0035">5</a> suggest
      reasons for being optimistic that the current north-south conflict can be resolved through further negotiated
      reforms of the Bretton Woods system that would satisfy some of the interests underlying the NIEO ideology. In
      order for the conflict to be resolved parts of the NIEO ideology itself would have to begin to guide the policies
      the international institutions follow. But in addition to better satisfying some third world interests, the
      operational ideology of an actual new international economic order would also have to reflect the self-defined
      economic interests of the governments of developed states more fully than the new order ideology does at present.
      The Afterword looks at this problem and at other impediments to a "debated" or
      "idea-generated" resolution to the current north-south conflict. It illustrates something hopeful in
      the fact that, even on its own terms, the NIEO ideology would be inadequate as the operational ideology for an
      actual new international economic order.
    </div>

    <div class="footnote">
      <h2 id="ht0008" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0008">Notes</a></h2>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0002">
        <a href="Ch01.xhtml#bck_fn0002">(1)</a>Κ. W. Rothschild, "The Small Nation and World Trade,"
        <span class="underline">Economic Journal</span> 54 (Apr. 1947): 35. Julius K. Nyerere quoted in Anthony J.
        Dolan and Jan van Ettinger, eds., <span class="underline">Partners in Tomorrow</span> (New York: E. P. Dutton,
        1978), p. 129.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0003">
        <a href="Ch01.xhtml#bck_fn0003">(2)</a>The group now includes well over a hundred members and some of
        them, like the oil producing states, are countries where people, on average, are now quite wealthy.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0004">
        <a href="Ch01.xhtml#bck_fn0004">(3)</a>Andrew M. Scott, "The Logic of International
        Interaction," <span class="underline">International Studies Quarterly</span> 21 (Sept. 1977): 429-60;
        David E. Apter, "Ideology in Modernizing Societies," in his <span class="underline">The Politics of
        Modernization</span> (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1965), pp. 313-56.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0005">
        <a href="Ch01.xhtml#bck_fn0005">(4)</a>Apter, p. 320.
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
