<div class="delete">

<h1 id="ht0009"><a id="page_11"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0009">1
    <br class="calibre1"/>
    The Alternative to Bretton Woods Before 1960</a></h1>
<h2 class="item1"><span class="underline">Bretton Woods</span>:</h2>
<div class="quotes">
<div class="text_noindent">
        . . . typified by the dollar sign, gold at Fort Knox, international cartelism, and a spider-web of Shylocks
        squeezing out the heart of hungry multitudes.
      </div>
<div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Diego Luis Molinari of Argentina, 1948
      </div>
</div>
<h2 class="item1"><span class="underline">And the alternative</span>:</h2>
<div class="quotes">
<div class="text_noindent">
        The undeveloped countries seek industrialization by some simple and quick route. By obtaining large loans with
        no strings attached and by offering enterprisers a monopoly of local markets they hope to build factories
        overnight. They do not believe that they must creep before they can walk.
      </div>
<div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Clair Wilcox of the United States, 1949(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0006" id="bck_fn0006">1</a>)
      </div>
</div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Molinari and Wilcox represented their respective governments at meetings called to create a world trade
      organization following the second world war. Their comments foreshadow the ideas and emotions expressed in the
      north-south conflict now, in the eighties. Moreover, they reflect the actual roots of that conflict, the issues
      that first divided north and south over thirty years ago.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Throughout the decade and a half following the second world war governments worked to establish a new, postwar
      economic order. The war ended with little consensus on the nature of the new order aside from agreement that
      there should be some sort of intergovernmental management to facilitate expansion of global production. The
      American government wanted regimes that would eliminate national regulation of trade. In <a id="page_12"></a>contrast, most other governments wanted international regimes to approve and coordinate national
      trade regulations. Eastern European governments wanted provisions encouraging bilateral trade agreements. Western
      European governments and Commonwealth members felt that proposals mooted by the United States during the war
      failed to respect worthwhile regulations that could be used to reduce unemployment. Many leaders of what we now
      call the third world were convinced, like Molinari, that American plans would enhance the economy of the United
      States at the expense of Latin American, Asian, and African plans for industrialization, plans belittled by
      Wilcox and other advocates of the American proposals.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In 1959, when the IMF and GATT both celebrated their first year of normal operation, the system had become
      something less than most of its founders had envisioned. Most east European governments had rejected the new
      economic system. Western European governments and those of developed Commonwealth countries had ceased to raise
      the issue of creating an international employment regime. Yet African, Asian, and Latin American governments had
      neither muted their doubts about the Bretton Woods institutions nor withdrawn from the system. They expressed
      their doubts through proposals that granting aid to other nations be considered a duty of statehood and through
      an economic analysis which said that industrialization was desirable and viable everywhere. By 1959 governments
      in the south had adopted a core of concepts around which proposals for reforming the postwar economic order could
      be organized and through which those governments would come to recognize one another as potential allies.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The history of the New International Economic Order ideology of the 1980s begins, then, in the 1940s when the
      issue of creating regimes to help manage world economic relations first appeared on the international agenda. It
      begins with the worldwide acceptance of the conception that advocates of the NIEO still share with the framers of
      Bretton Woods, the belief that some degree of intergovernmental economic management is desirable. Only after the
      first Bretton Woods agreements did the south articulate a new ethic of international economic relations. This
      notion of economic rights and duties of states that morally grounded the specific global policies desired by the
      poorer states outside of Europe during and immediately after the war -- technical assistance, commodity pricing
      agreements, and multilateral aid.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      With this ethic the founders of the new order movement presented a policy analysis justifying the reforms they
      proposed in terms of goals they shared with leaders of both the developed nations and the nations that had once
      been developed, before they were impoverished by the war. The new analysis said that a historically determined
      structure of the world economy <a id="page_13"></a>impeded optimal economic growth. This analysis began and
      remained controversial and distinct from the analysis that came to guide day to day policy making within postwar
      regimes. Yet the analysis was always politically significant. Through the new analysis, African, Asian, and Latin
      American governments could see each other as sharing economic problems distinct from those of industrial nations.
      The analysis explained the division of the world into rich north and poor south; it pointed to a concrete reality
      behind the symbol of the "third world."
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This chapter relates the history of the first period in the emergence of the new order ideology, emphasizing that
      it developed around southern grievances with the emerging Bretton Woods regimes. Those grievances explain the
      focus of the new order ideology on global management and the south's state-centered ethic of rights and
      duties as well as the structural policy analysis accepted by many Asian, African, and Latin American governments.
      They adopted the ethic and analysis to frame specific grievances which precluded the adoption of other
      contemporary theories about international economic relations, including the slightly modified laissez faire
      theory underlying the Bretton Woods institutions. Throughout this chapter I compare that dominant ideology, which
      emerged as part of the Bretton Woods system in the forties and fifties, to those concepts that came to form the
      base of the new order ideology.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0012"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0012">Consensus on Global Management,
    Disagreement Over National Regulation of Trade</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      The intergovernmental institutions involved in the management of economic relations after the second world war
      came about through negotiation. Admittedly, Americans set the agendas for international conferences and used
      threats and promises backed by American economic power to preclude some options championed by other states.
      Nonetheless, ultimately postwar institutions were not created by dictatorial fiat of a single power but by
      agreement of all the nations that signed their charters. Given that the founders had to resolve disputes among
      people with fundamentally different visions of what the world economic order should be, it is remarkable that the
      postwar system developed at all. Consensus was reached only because the Americans raised the least controversial
      issues about postwar regimes first and then helped resolve them by pointing to ways that institutions proposed by
      the U.S. would expand production throughout the world, a paramount concern for most governments.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      When the Americans finally raised the issue of creating an international organization to coordinate national
      regulation of trade and, ultimately, left it unresolved because consensus could not be reached, most <a id="page_14"></a>nations had already agreed upon some institutions that had the ability to restrict such national
      regulation. An American desire for free trade thus became a principle of actual postwar regimes as if by default,
      and the governments that remained unconvinced that a free trade system would allow them to achieve their economic
      goals, yet accepted the new regimes, found themselves arguing against a status quo assumption that global
      management should be constrained by free trade principles. In addition, by accepting the new regime's rules
      for amendment, those governments opposing free trade made it impossible for themselves to effectively express
      their grievances within the system. Under the rules of the IMF, World Bank, and GATT, the governments opposing
      free trade had little voice. Their grievances with the new system were left to be expressed within the United
      Nations General Assembly and the short-lived conference on creating an international trade and employment regime,
      arenas in which all governments were granted equal power.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The early consensus on the postwar institutions that were created reflected general agreement among scholars and
      policy makers throughout the world that it was folly to allow the global economy to be ungoverned by some notion
      of the common good. They considered this a lesson of the two world wars.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      By the early 1940s the intellectual sources of that lesson were myriad. Some democratic socialists in the early
      part of the century had predicted and supported a universal alliance among empires in which the inevitable
      conflicts of their expanding economies would be resolved. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0007" id="bck_fn0007">2</a>) Studies of business cycles pointed to the interdependence of national economies and
      the desirability of coordinating anticyclical policies.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0008" id="bck_fn0008">3</a>) Scholars joined policy makers in blaming restrictive trade practices for setting the
      conditions for the second world war, such as the dependence of east European economies on Germany.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0009" id="bck_fn0009">4</a>) And Keynes's polemic, <span class="underline">The
      Economic Consequences of the Peace</span>, written in 1919, with its forecast of vindictive trade and monetary
      policies and the ultimate collapse of the European economy, read like prophecy. Policy makers even accorded
      Keynes's solution -- for governments to agree to jointly undertake the benign international management
      functions performed by City of London bankers in the nineteenth century -- the respect a prophet's vision
      deserves.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0010" id="bck_fn0010">5</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In countries with market economies, where government intervention was usually questioned, mobilization for the
      war brought officials practical experience in using economic controls. Mobilization also brought economists into
      government in greater numbers than ever before. An explosion of innovative exchange and production policies
      resulted, some with international implications. They ranged from the marketing boards for primary commodities in
      the British colonies to lend-lease arrangements for <a id="page_15"></a>financing expanded American production
      and Allied war needs.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0011" id="bck_fn0011">6</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Governments throughout the world helped manage economies during the war; increased intervention occurred even
      outside the combatant states. If anything, the British government more strictly managed the economies of its
      colonies and dependencies for the war effort than it did the economy of the home country. Native administrators,
      who would later become leaders of independent nations, learned the tools of economic planning during the war.
      (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0012" id="bck_fn0012">7</a>) Throughout the war, Latin American nations even
      received U.S. support for internal policies of economic diversification and industrialization in exchange for
      both their political and economic support of the Allies. Latin American governments attempted to negotiate
      international agreements that would help assure stable terms of trade for the goods they exported. They also
      demanded to be allowed to protect infant industries with tariffs and to receive global support for their import
      substitution policies. Throughout the war the United States supported such suggestions despite ideological
      objection to them by the highest policy makers. As the State Department put it in 1941, American free trade
      principles were "moderated in practice" to support the international agreements desired by Latin
      America.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0013" id="bck_fn0013">8</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nonetheless, when most American policy makers thought about postwar institutions they rarely moderated their
      advocacy of liberal principles. The State Department under Cordell Hull consistently maintained that "free
      trade" and "free enterprise" should define moral boundaries circumscribing the role of any postwar
      intergovernmental economic organization. The department's notion of "free enterprise" involved both
      support for market-oriented internal policies and strong opposition to "monopolistic practices,"
      partially of firms but more especially of national governments. This included opposition to most tariffs,
      quantitative restrictions upon amounts of goods imported or exported, multilateral interference in the market to
      support the price of certain goods (commodity agreements), and special bilateral trade agreements -- all of which
      American policy makers considered means of giving monopoly-like advantages to national firms.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0014" id="bck_fn0014">9</a>) The State Department supported global regimes that would create
      conditions under which unrestricted trade was possible, a system whose goals would include abolition of just the
      sort of international economic arrangements toward which the Americans had agreed to negotiate with Latin
      American states during the war. While Latin American policy makers were more typical of others throughout the
      world in envisioning postwar institutions as regulating the way national governments regulated trade, the State
      Department envisioned a world federal government dedicated to removing all barriers to trade erected by national
      <a id="page_16"></a>governments.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Commercial Affairs Division Chief Herman Geist accurately reflected this vision and the feelings of those who
      held it when he said:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      Let me warn against the futile speculations of theorists who would have us deviate from sound principles in
      international trade and espouse methods of dealing repugnant to our way of life. If in the international sphere
      we reject political and social systems harmful to mankind, we must also repudiate the economic practices upon
      which they are based. If we hold fast to our destiny we shall create an indivisible and advancing civilization
      upon the foundation of our prosperity and rear a new edifice where enlightenment based on material, moral, and
      spiritual progress will finally decide the future of mankind.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0015" id="bck_fn0015">10</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      From this point of view, international trade deviating from the ideal of free enterprise domestically and
      internationally — the ideal Roosevelt was to call a basic economic right in 1943(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0016" id="bck_fn0016">11</a>) — was anathema. Rejection of fascism implied rejection of the restrictive trade
      practices employed by fascist states. Governments that rejected restrictive trade practices could expect a
      wealthy, moral world in return. They even could expect conditional American assistance to aid economic
      development. As one official put it:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      Plans for investing in developing the resources and diversifying underdeveloped areas must have as an outstanding
      object the promotion of international trade in the interests of all countries providing the help as well as in
      the interests of the countries receiving it. It makes little sense if governments maintain or impose new
      obstacles to trade which is sought to develop, thereby destroying the trade and investment as well. In the last
      analysis, every problem in the field of economic relations resolves itself into a problem of trade.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0017" id="bck_fn0017">12</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This statement could be read as a promise of American aid and investment in exchange for adoption of free trade
      and free enterprise policies. Geist's "foundation" of American "prosperity," the wealth
      of the United States, assured that there would be investment in poorer countries as long as they did not impose
      obstacles. In 1941 when Dean Acheson spoke of this State Department vision of a federated world dedicated to free
      trade and formed under American leadership through promises of American investment, as the "last best hope
      of mankind."(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0018" id="bck_fn0018">13</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
<a id="page_17"></a>As Geist makes clear, some economic theorists in the early forties did not welcome this
      proposed "edifice" of international government dedicated to free trade and free enterprise. Not all of
      those theorists were apologists for totalitarian regimes. Because of the reputation of Keynes's work, which
      influenced many policy makers in the United States as well as in the Commonwealth and Latin America, and because
      of Keynes's own role as the major negotiator for Great Britain at early conferences called to create postwar
      regimes, the most serious challenge to the State Department vision was Keynesian.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Keynes supported the formation of intergovernmental organizations that would be more limited in their effects on
      existing restrictive national trade policies, yet more interventionist than those envisioned by the American
      State Department. Keynes wanted to give latitude to governments to regulate their trade and the use of their
      currency when the absence of such regulation might result in unemployment. Yet, Keynes wanted intergovernmental
      organizations to have the financial capability to support full-employment policies, a management role that went
      far beyond the one envisioned by the State Department.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0019" id="bck_fn0019">14</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In his seemingly prophetic 1944 article, British economist K. W. Rothschild laid out what he believed to be the
      fundamental differences between Keynesians and free enterprise advocates over matters of international trade.
      Rothschild called the free enterprise "federal solution" to problems of trade and the global economy in
      general, ". . .a remnant of the idea that the mere removal of regulation and interference will give us
      paradise on earth." Rothschild rejected that idea:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      The frequent abuse of tariffs, quotas, and monetary methods for aggressive purposes and
      "beggar-my-neighbor" policies has clearly shown that the absence of <span class="underline">this</span>
      type of regulation would be beneficial to the vast majority of people. But the fact that certain tools are
      misused does not justify us jumping to the conclusion that the removal of tools is preferable to their proper
      use.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Rothschild's Keynesian position had it that the potentially beneficial effects of international trade
      restrictions should be studied rather than ruled out in principle. The Keynesians considered ruling restrictive
      policies out "in principle" to be either an unscientific response to a few cases where restrictive
      policies had proved to be detrimental or else an uncritical acceptance of theories which ignored significant
      elements of the actual world economy. Rothschild continues:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      That the complete removal of tools is so widely accepted as the best solution is probably also due to the fact
      that the two most outstanding modern <a id="page_18"></a>books on the theory of international trade exclude
      monopolistic phenomena and problems connected with the trade cycle from the larger treatment of the subject. Will
      a consideration of them not necessitate a modification of the conclusions which were based on the assumption of
      perfect competition and a highly flexible economic system in which frictional forces play only a minor
      part?(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0020" id="bck_fn0020">15</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_noindent">
      The Keynesians thought, of course, that such explicit consideration of monopolies and trade cycles <span class="underline">would</span> necessitate new policy conclusions.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      American officials were concerned with the ways business cycles affected trade, but when making foreign policy
      they rarely worried about how the investment decisions made by private firms affected those cycles. American
      officials downplayed the significance of firms that had monopoly powers in their own right, considering monopoly
      powers to be a global problem only when they were created by the trade practices of states. Consequently, had
      they further investigated "monopoly practices," as they understood them, American policy makers still
      would not have reached new policy conclusions.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Americans based their insistence upon the mutual desirability of both global free trade and the creation of free
      enterprise economies around the world on something more than generalization from the results of restrictive
      practice prior to the war. Their views reflected something more than uncritical acceptance of abstract trade
      theories. Praise of free trade and free enterprise reflected convictions developed while guiding the United
      States out of the depression. Adherents reasonably could say that these beliefs were prudent, altruistic, and
      proven in practice — if not always consistent one with another.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      To justify that free trade could be good in itself supporters could point to the abstract theories. Those
      theories demonstrated, at the very least, that if a free trade system meeting their assumptions could be created,
      there would be opportunities for greater production worldwide.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Yet extensive government intervention in the status quo world economy would be needed just to create such a
      system. Intervention would be needed, on the one hand, to dismantle existing restrictive trade practices, and, on
      the other, to assure that the nations which could make or break the system had the financial wherewithal to
      benefit from the new export opportunities that the system would give them.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      American policy makers saw creating such a system as a political task similar to the one confronted by the
      Roosevelt administration in bringing the U.S. out of the slump in the thirties: They had to get powerful economic
      <a id="page_19"></a>actors who supported the status quo of inefficient, restricted trade together with those who
      desired greater redistributive intervention in the economy to work together to increase production and support
      the <span class="underline">growth-</span>rather than <span class="underline">redistribution</span>-oriented
      interventionist policies of the government. During the depression the government<sup class="item2">'</sup>s
      partial reliance on free enterprise to expand the economy was essential to get business support for the
      interventionist programs of the Roosevelt administration. Expanding production, not redistribution of economic
      goods or the power to produce them, was the key to that program. As Charles Maier puts it, members of the
      Roosevelt administration sought to transform the class-based political problem of the depression and,
      "adjourn class conflict for consensus on growth."(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0021" id="bck_fn0021">16</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Their success makes it not surprising that they brought the same focus on economic growth to debates over
      international economic relations. Under conditions that still had to be created through intervention in the
      postwar world economy, free trade could assure growth. But it was just as politically important during those
      debates that the principled insistence upon free trade by men like Hull, Geist, and Acheson served to enlist the
      support of much of the American business community behind new international institutions that would intervene in
      the world economy to help it expand. State Department support of free trade even helped legitimize the least
      market-oriented parts of the postwar order — like the system of fixed exchange rates for national currencies
      under the eye of international financial institutions controlled by governments rather than by private interests.
      This system was first championed by the Treasury Department, which was more influenced by Keynesian concerns than
      the State Department was. The State Department explained the interventionist financial institutions as a
      necessary support system for an ultimately noninterventionist free trade regime. In doing so they created
      business support for the leadership role that the U.S. government would take in making all the postwar regimes
      work, including business acceptance of the financial burden of that leadership, the massive aid and investment
      needed to assure that many nations could expand production.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Of course, American officials expected that ultimately such an open international economic system would further
      American interests. It would open avenues for exports that would quell the American fears in the early 1940s of
      postwar overproduction and recession.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0022" id="bck_fn0022">17</a> ) An open
      international system would assure U.S. firms access to foreign raw materials, again helping to assure further
      U.S. economic growth. But, because they considered expansion of the American economy necessary if the goods
      needed by war-devastated poorer countries were to be produced, American policy makers could find a large <a id="page_20"></a>element of altruism in their insistence upon the free trade principles that would serve American
      interests.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0023" id="bck_fn0023">18</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      At first, in the early 1940s when intergovernmental consultation was mostly limited to monetary and financial
      matters, Americans placed more emphasis on adjourning global economic conflict for consensus on growth than they
      did upon the principles of free trade and free enterprise. The American emphasis on expansion in general helped
      international consensus on financial and monetary matters to be reached quickly, if slightly imperfectly; the
      organizations created were unacceptable to the Soviet Union and many of its allies. The liberal Keynesians, like
      the free market theorists, accepted facilitating growth as the central goal for postwar institutions. Growth had
      been the goal of liberal economics since Smith. In the world depleted by the war, policy makers, not
      surprisingly, accepted the economists' focus on growth. Even in the countries least affected by the war, like
      the Latin American states, the central national economic goal was growth. That was the point of industrialization
      and diversification. Only in the socialist countries, where policy makers had a superordinate concern with
      maintaining socialist national economies in a capitalist world, did national goals preclude acceptance of
      international organizations designed to coordinate monetary and financial matters in order to facilitate economic
      growth.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In addition to the general prevalence of expanding production as a top-priority item on national agendas, another
      thing assured that consensus could be reached quickly in the early years: The issues addressed at the conferences
      for creating monetary and financial institutions did not preclude agreement at a later date upon the sorts of
      restrictive trade policies many governments desired. And when nations had central economic goals other than
      maximizing production, governments tended to relate those goals more to trade than to monetary or financial
      policy. When they agreed upon the charters of the IMF and the World Bank, all governments expected that a third
      institution, the International Trade Organization (ITO) would later be created to join the fund and the bank as
      centers of the intergovernmental regimes managing postwar economic relations.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Keynes's ideas illustrate why those governments which remained uncommitted to free trade considered this
      trade organization to be so important. They expected the ITO to offer an international framework for dealing with
      trade-related unemployment problems and for coordinating government programs of restricting trade to encourage
      domestic investment in countries where powerful foreign firms would not invest. Keynesians felt that these issues
      had to be resolved both because a framework was needed to maximize growth and because full employment and
      national programs for economic development were good in <a id="page_21"></a>themselves.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Keynesians believed that in a world governed by free trade principles, national programs to maintain full
      employment, and hence full use of productive factors, could become unworkable due to foreign recession. A country
      whose exports suddenly became less valuable because of the economic difficulties of nations importing those items
      would also suffer from the slump. Production in the export sector would be limited, and there would be
      unemployment unless that country's government were allowed to use trade and monetary policies to cushion the
      impact of foreign recessions. This view reflected a major worry the British government and the governments of
      other developed non-Axis market nations — especially Australia -- had throughout the war. They feared that their
      countries might have to suffer from further recessions in the United States where they believed anticyclical
      policies were less well developed than in their own countries.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0024" id="bck_fn0024">19</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Keynes proposed that subsidies for affected exporters and some trade restrictions (that would, in a sense, punish
      the countries that had not developed anti-cyclical policies) should be allowed in such cases. He also proposed
      that whatever sort of international bank was created after the war be mandated to help finance national policies
      that would contain the international diffusion of recession. Given the importance of bringing the advanced
      Commonwealth countries into the postwar global system, Keynes got his way, in part. The IMF came to function as a
      creditor to nations experiencing problems that had foreign causes or might have foreign effects.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0025" id="bck_fn0025">20</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Less effectively aired in the early forties were Keynesian proposals designed to increase the ability of smaller,
      less developed countries to restrict their international trade in order to diversify their economies. Rothschild
      outlines the justifications for such proposals by arguing that in a postwar laissez faire world, powerful,
      monopolistic private firms would continue to be able to decide where most investment would be made. Unlike the
      competitive firms of economics textbooks, real monopolistic firms would invest in such a way that the
      specialization resulting from free trade would fail to employ resources throughout the world with great
      efficiency. The conservative investment practices of industrial monopolies assured that they would only heavily
      invest where they had invested before:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      If a <span class="underline">laisser-faire</span> policy is pursued the creation of a federal union will tend to
      reinforce and perpetuate the economic structure of its constituent members. The greater industrial countries will
      become centers of heavy and other monopolistic industries, the smaller countries will find oppor<a id="page_22"></a>tunities in small-scale industries and agriculture. Backward countries will remain backward just
      because they were backward before.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0026" id="bck_fn0026">21</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This was just the sort of future feared by policy makers in Latin America and in other other independent less
      developed regions. For them the free trade system might mean less than optimal growth. More importantly, a free
      trade world would be one in which they would be allowed none of their traditional powers to compensate for a lack
      of foreign industrial investment.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      As it was chartered, the World Bank could become a lending agency that would help poorer nations combat the
      parochial investment decisions of monopolistic firms. But governments in the nations with few industries felt
      that other policies, including internationally sanctioned tariff protection of infant industries, would be also
      needed. They left comprehensive international discussion of such policies to the debates over the ITO in the late
      forties.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Even at the beginning of those trade discussions, the less industrialized countries' negotiating position was
      weak. Before the discussions started, the IMF and the World Bank looked like institutions that would help
      recreate the prewar worldwide division of labor and maintain it. The IMF was designed to encourage nations to
      allow their national currencies to be freely converted into those of other nations. It would try to eliminate the
      possibility that a nation could use restrictions on foreign exchange to prevent the flight of capital to more
      lucrative investments abroad. The World Bank accepted as its first priority industrial reconstruction of the war
      torn regions, first in Europe, thus helping reestablish the prewar division between a relatively industrialized
      north and relatively nonindustrial south.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Yet statesmen in the forties saw things differently. Despite the prescience of theorists like Rothschild on other
      matters, the possibility that the IMF and the World Bank could help recreate and maintain the old global division
      of wealth and poverty was hardly recognized when those institutions were formed. Preventing the establishment of
      such a division, and thus accounting for the Keynesian doubts about the ultimate effects of the international
      investment policies of powerful firms, was, for most concerned officials, a matter of trade policy. Trade
      controls had been the most frequently employed policy for maintaining and enhancing the relative economic
      positions of particular nations since mercantilist times. The ITO negotiations appeared to most as the logical
      place to raise such issues.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0027" id="bck_fn0027">22</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Despite the fact that creating a trade organization would remain an issue of international politics for five
      years after 1947, the actual intergovernmental institutions of the postwar system had all been chartered by
      <a id="page_23"></a>then. The last agreement was the GATT. Taken together the IMF, World Bank, and GATT
      represented a consensus among market countries that global management aimed at expanding production was
      essential. From the standpoint of a laissez faire advocate, those regimes were complete in themselves. Had they
      actually appeared complete to all governments, their creation would have represented the achievement of the
      American goal; intergovernmental economic conflict would have been overcome through consensus on growth. The IMF
      provided a mechanism for dealing with short term balance of payments problems and currency conversion, thus
      making trade easier and encouraging growth to accommodate the new trade potential that the easing of exchange
      problems would create. World Bank provisions of capital would aid war torn states and allow them to productively
      enter the world system. The GATT defined conditions under which trade would go on. It emphasized the removal of
      tariffs and other restrictions thus creating new opportunities for trade and production. Free trade theories as
      far back as Ricardo's or Smith's could be used to show why this system was designed to facilitate growth:
      Specialization encouraged by increasingly free world trade would result in the more efficient and complete
      employment of labor and capital everywhere. From the laissez faire point of view the move to maximize global
      production had begun.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nonetheless, in 1947 it would have seemed odd to the delegates at international conferences on economic matters
      had anyone suggested that the postwar system was fully developed. They considered the GATT only a stopgap measure
      to encourage trade before comprehensive agreement on the ITO could be reached. GATT was designed so that export
      sectors could start to function as catalysts to growth. It reflected no agreement on trade-related goals other
      than growth, such Keynesian goals as full employment and economic development.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0028" id="bck_fn0028">23</a>) In addition, in 1947 direct American aid to the war torn countries was becoming
      increasingly more important rather than less important, thus casting some doubt on the effectiveness of the
      Bretton Woods monetary and financial regimes. Even those regimes were still incompletely defined in an important
      sense: The ideas that would guide their decisions were not yet fixed.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In 1946, six weeks before he died, Keynes addressed the first meeting of the IMF Board of Governors. He
      encouraged them and their counterparts at the World Bank to develop independent policy analysis rather than to be
      tied to the policies and analyses preferred by their most powerful members. Keynes revealed some of that insight
      often attributed to those near death. He correctly predicted what the postwar international economic management
      system would become, forseeing the limited fulfillment of his vision.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      IMF and World Bank charters mandated their staffs to <a id="page_24"></a>make decisions, in Keynes's words,
      "on their merits," to employ empirical analysis and rationally choose the best policies to achieve
      those goals all IMF members had agreed upon. Conscious, rational public management of the world economy had
      become a structure, a relatively permanent source of influence, in the world economy alongside the structures
      which emerge unconsciously from habitual market relations and the rarely coordinated interventions made by
      national governments. Within this unprecedented realm for making decisions in the global interest conflicts could
      be resolved by reference to economic theory and to empirical analysis of the ways alternative policies could be
      expected to affect accepted goals.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This much Keynes both knew and was glad of; yet he feared that this realm of conscious management to achieve
      global goals would be unduly limited by purely political decisions, decisions not reached through reference to
      the best economic analysis but ones reflecting only the interests of some predominant coalition of powerful
      governments:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      You two brats [the IMF and the World Bank] shall grow up politicians . . . everything you shall determine shall
      not be for its own merits, but because of something else.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0029" id="bck_fn0029">24</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Of necessity, the two institutions had a specifically political element. Goals cannot be chosen by empirical
      analysis; they are a matter of political judgement. Furthermore, economists can disagree on the effects of
      proposed policies. Some extrascientific means is needed to determine whose economic analysis will guide policy
      making. Keynes's deep worry was that the political mechanisms in the postwar system would assure that his own
      sort of economic analysis would rarely be employed to solve policy problems.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      He had reason to worry, given the political principle the postwar institutions would adhere to when resolving
      disputes that could not be resolved by referring to economic theory. This principle is that nations should be
      able to influence such decisions in proportion to the strength of their economies. Keynes's fears were well
      grounded because of the predominance of the American economy and the propensity of American policy makers to
      prefer laissez faire analysis. In the IMF and the World Bank the principle of granting influence in proportion to
      the strength took the form of voting rights weighted on the basis of a formula primarily reflecting levels of
      production.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0030" id="bck_fn0030">25</a>) Even under the GATT this principle was
      established through rules for negotiating tariff reductions which required states not to award preferential
      tariffs to any nation while encouraging direct bargaining between all nations. <a id="page_25"></a>Nations with
      more diverse and productive economies could make more concessions than poorer nations in order to achieve the
      specific liberalizations they desired, and they could stop making concessions long before reducing all their
      barriers to trade with poorer countries.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0031" id="bck_fn0031">26</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Due to their adherence to this political principle, the IMP and World Bank could only become widely legitimate
      management institutions if their most powerful members sometimes acted selflessly. Wealthy members had to
      restrain themselves from using those institutions soley to advance their own interests and their own ideas about
      correct economics.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Some American actions in the forties suggest the U.S. accepted this restrained leadership role; others suggest
      the U.S. abandoned the role to pursue interests that were narrowly its own.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      At first, in the late forties, many governments came to question the American commitment primarily because the
      U.S. started to insist upon its free trade principles as soon as the ITO negotiations began. Editorials in the
      liberal London <span class="underline">Economist</span> are good indications of European and developed
      Commonwealth doubts. During the first ITO conference in 1945 the <span class="underline">Economist</span>'s
      exasperated editor wrote of the American delegate that his, "simple-minded identification of free trade with
      prosperity, world peace, and economic freedom sounded out of date. "(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0032" id="bck_fn0032">27</a>) Throughout the following two years the <span class="underline">Economist</span> would
      decry the U.S. for caring a great deal about increasing the volume of world trade while failing to recognize that
      a modern economy has other needs than maximizing wealth,(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0033" id="bck_fn0033">28</a>) for offering much to American business in its ITO proposals while offering nothing
      that would aid the world's working people, and for failing to offer to redistribute the world's wealth in
      the face of existing global scarcities. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0034" id="bck_fn0034">29</a>) The last
      point reflected the fact that the Europeans' slowly growing awareness of the extent of the war's
      destruction made them ask that the U.S. share its wealth.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      New American pledges of economic aid for postwar reconstruction of the formerly wealthy parts of the world, over
      and above pledges to the World Bank, certainly reflected American willingness to accept some of the
      responsibilities Europeans understood to be incumbent upon the world economy's leader. After the announcement
      of significant loans to Britain and the development of the Marshall Plan, the tone of the <span class="underline">Economist</span>'s editorials changed. They first accepted and ultimately supported British
      involvement in a global economic system under American leadership. The U.S., while it called the shots, still
      loaned enough that others could join the game.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0035" id="bck_fn0035">30</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      European demands for American aid triggered similar demands from those poor nations which, like Ethiopia and a
      few countries in Asia, had suffered from the war as <a id="page_26"></a>long as any other Allied state. Those
      countries had not been included in the American programs. Similar demands even came from poorer countries that
      had not been so directly affected by the war.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      At the 1947 ITO conference, where the GATT was negotiated, American pledges of aid became a salient issue. Actual
      American pledges of aid served to diminish European and developed Commonwealth insistence upon a postwar regime
      that would allow wide trade restrictions. At the 1947 conference, pledges of Marshall Plan aid even created a
      majority behind the preliminary charter proposed by the U.S. Pledged aid could provide the capital for industrial
      reconstruction, including purchases from the U.S. that would serve to keep the American economy booming; the U.S.
      had removed the need to restrict trade in order to force domestic reinvestment, and had shown itself willing to
      intervene aggressively to make sure its own economy did not go into recession.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0036" id="bck_fn0036">31</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In 1948, partially toward the same end of achieving agreement on free trade principles, the U.S. government
      offered to cooperate within the United Nations system to encourage economic development in countries that had
      never been industrialized. This offer was less effective than promised Marshall Plan aid in rallying support for
      American proposals since it was tied to the requirement that the U.S. government be allowed to evaluate the
      extent to which development plans were ". . . soundly conceived, mutually consistent, and effectively
      coordinated." (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0037" id="bck_fn0037">32</a>) The second <span class="underline">Annual Report</span> of the World Bank, publicizing the bank's lending policies for the first
      time, suggested what those words might mean both to the only existing United Nations aid organization and to its
      most powerful member. The report stressed that governments applying for aid should encourage liberal trade and
      the free flow of capital within their country as well as see that all their national debts to private firms, most
      of which were firms in the U.S., were quickly paid. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0038" id="bck_fn0038">33</a>)
      Rather than construing the American offer as one of exchanging development aid for acceptance of international
      laissez faire, most less industrialized nations read the American offer as an attempt to prescribe internal as
      well as external free market economies in the interest of American firms.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Between 1947 and 1948 the ITO conference moved from Europe to Havana and expanded to include many more
      representatives of Asian and Latin American countries. In Havana the United States made its pledges to provide
      aid to poorer countries within the U.N. But throughout the conference, delegates from Asian and Latin American
      countries waited in vain for the U.S. to announce a program of the scale and kind of the Marshall Plan -- a
      program of substantial direct aid to the development projects chosen by leaders in recipient countries. A <a id="page_27"></a>clear American statement came only after the ITO conference. At the Inter-American conference in
      Bogota a reporter confronted Secretary Marshall with the argument that the economic need of Latin America was
      greater than that of Europe because on average Latin Americans consumed fewer calories than Europeans. Marshall
      answered that the United States planned no direct aid to Latin America. He said that the benefits of American aid
      to Europe would "trickle down" to the poor of Latin America if Latin American governments accepted free
      trade principles. Increasing European demand, particularly for agricultural (not industrial) goods, would mean
      economic growth for Latin America. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0039" id="bck_fn0039">34</a>) This was the
      unacceptable answer negotiators from the poorer countries had come to expect by the end of ITO conference.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Without the promise of acceptable American aid, the majority at the 1948 ITO conference transformed the free
      trade charter into the charter of an organization that could support some restrictive trade policies. Molinari
      made his emotional statement about the U.S. position, quoted at the head of this chapter, at this conference.
      Under the leadership of the larger Latin American states and India, the ITO conference amended the American
      proposals by accepting articles governing preferential tariffs, commodity agreements, and bilateral trade
      agreements as well as by accepting the principle that the ITO would make decisions on the basis of one nation one
      vote.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0040" id="bck_fn0040">35</a>) But the fluidity of the international
      situation in 1948 and the fact that the U.S. did not firmly reject the less industrialized nations' demands
      for economic aid until after the ITO conference allowed American delegates to retain some free trade elements of
      their charter, including the central position of the GATT as the basis for tariff negotiations.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0041" id="bck_fn0041">36</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The charter that came out of the Havana meeting was a compromise only in the sense that it represented a middle
      ground. It was not a compromise acceptable to most of the governments represented at the meeting. The Havana
      Charter, and with it the ITO, died of neglect in the early fifties after the U.S. Senate and (partially in
      response to the U.S. action) all but two other governments failed to ratify it. Ironically, the coalition that
      killed the ITO in the U.S. included firms and unions with protectionist interests that resembled those of the
      less industrial states.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0042" id="bck_fn0042">37</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In his 1949 inaugural address President Truman reversed the U.S. position on aid to Asia and Latin America with
      his "point four" promises of U.S. technical assistance. Point four aid, like Marshall Plan aid, came to
      be conditional as much upon a potential recipient's willingness to accept the American security doctrine as
      upon willingness to accept the American point of view on economics. Given the simultaneous rise of the trade and
      aid issues on the international agenda in the late <a id="page_28"></a>forties, followed by an apparent American
      willingness to consider expanding its aid to poorer countries, aid rather than trade became the more central
      issue of the north-south economic debate in the 1950s. But the death of the ITO was inconclusive. American
      willingness to aid southern nations as part of its anticommunist policy implied no change in American support of
      its free trade principles. And Latin American, Asian, and African acceptance of aid implied no rejection of the
      sort of restrictive trade policies they had hoped the ITO would support.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The grievances of the anti-free trade forces at Havana did not die, but with the end of an ongoing forum where
      each state had an equal opportunity to express its opinion on trade matters those grievances were removed to the
      debates in the central organs of the United Nations, where aid matters could be discussed as well. The IMF and
      World Bank continued to provide opportunities to express grievances, but the narrow specializations of those
      organizations along with their restricted membership and voting rules made them less likely places for the poorer
      countries' protests than the General Assembly. We must turn to the debates in the General Assembly to see how
      Asian, African, and Latin American leaders transformed their grievances about one new international economic
      order into the ideas underlying proposals for another.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0013"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0013">Economic Rights and Duties of
    States</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      When the trade issue was placed on the international agenda in 1945, governments that wanted to retain national
      trade regulations were confronted with the problem of explaining the moral basis for their trade restrictions.
      They had to counter the argument that such regulations were unjust in principle. Within the milieu of economic
      ideas in 1945 were at least three possible "principled" justifications for regulating trade. One was
      Keynes's "scientific" principle: If it could be demonstrated, as the Keynesians felt it could, that
      economic efficiency and general welfare would be enhanced by trade regulation, then the principles of rational
      economic policy making would themselves dictate such regulation. The second possible justification required
      invoking traditional ideas of national sovereignty including the the right of sovereign nations to determine
      their own economic policy. The third possible justification could be found in the more complex notion of
      sovereignty found in the United Nations Charter, among other places. One interpretation of the charter allowed
      governments to argue that it was both a right of states to regulate trade and a duty of wealthier states to aid
      poorer ones. Because it justified both the trade and aid arguments that southern nations made they chose this
      <a id="page_29"></a>third principle as the moral basis for the reforms they requested.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The U.N. Charter barely outlines the economic roles that the organization has acquired since its inception in
      1945. Yet from the earliest meeting of the General Assembly, the charter's preamble and its more extensive
      ninth chapter have provided the sort of moral justification needed by framers of the emerging New International
      Economic Order ideology. In the early years the charter especially appealed to governments with little influence
      in the IMF and World Bank, governments that could not expect the volume of economic aid that was given to western
      Europe. The charter speaks of respecting "equal rights" of nations large and small, of promoting better
      standards of living, full employment, and development. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0043" id="bck_fn0043">38</a>) Moreover, the ninth chapter gives the responsibility for overseeing the economic
      roles of the U.N. and its specialized agencies, like the IMF and the World Bank, to the General Assembly.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0044" id="bck_fn0044">39</a>) In the assembly, where all states are equally powerful,
      interested governments could push for economic development programs to be undertaken by all U.N. agencies as well
      as for policies that would encourage international acceptance of the idea that each state has the right to
      regulate its international trade.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The charter is ambiguous. Its relevant paragraphs could equally be used as moral justification for the postwar
      economic regimes as they had been developed by 1947. The duty of nations to cooperate to improve standards of
      living could be considered a mandate for the cooperation needed to reduce trade barriers. The equal economic
      rights of states might be understood as their equal rights to join and receive the benefits of the IMP, World
      Bank, and GATT as well as the more specific rights to expect reciprocity and equal treatment in tariff reductions
      that the GATT was meant to assure.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Governments supporting trade regulations would never come to interpret the charter's economic principles in
      that way. From the earliest negotiations on the formation of the United Nations, eastern European socialist
      governments as well as most of those from the later-to-emerge third world took the charter to grant U.N. members
      the rights to choose both a domestic system of ownership and control of property and an international orientation
      of their economy, the right to choose either a more open or more closed system. Understood in this way, the
      economic rights of national governments precluded the creation of a universal free trade and free enterprise
      system so long as any state, for whatever reason, supported a more closed or planned economy. Under this
      interpretation, the charter's sections about the duties of states could not be understood as duties to
      support the postwar regimes extant in the late 1940s. U.N. members who opposed the postwar order had to give
      those <a id="page_30"></a>sections of the charter new meaning.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In its simplest form, the interpretation third world (but not eastern European) opponents came to accept demanded
      that every state aid the economic development of every other state to the best of its ability and with the
      relative needs of all states in mind. The south understood the equal rights of states as giving each government
      the right to choose its own development path, while believing material support of every nation's particular
      development program to be an international matter.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This principle might be summarized as, "from each state according to its ability, to each state according to
      its need" in order to emphasize two things about the ethic the south developed from the U.N. Charter: (1) It
      concerned states rather than individuals or corporations as the moral agents of international economic relations,
      and (2) it implied aid should be awarded on the basis of need, to the extent that donors could provide it, not on
      the basis of mutual interest or out of charity.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This Utopian principle, the ethic for a sort of global communism of nations, had a short practical life in the
      mid-1940s as the principle governing the policies of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration
      (UNRRA), especially when it was directed by former New York Mayor Fiorello La Guardia. Because La Guardia was the
      first person to argue within the U.N. for the principles that would come to underlie southern demands for
      reformed international economic relations throughout the three decades following UNRRA's dismantling, his
      views are worth discussing in some detail.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      La Guardia spoke before the Second (Economic) Committee at the first meeting of the General Assembly in the fall
      of 1946. He had directed UNRAA for less than a year but the organization was not much older. The U.S. had created
      UNRRA during the war to provide food and other needed goods to areas liberated from the Axis powers.
      Contributions from noncombatant "United Nations," the wartime allies, served to ease the economic
      burden of the war on the United States and firm up the commitment of the noncombatant states to the Allied
      effort. Latin America donated a politically significant part of UNRRA's resources.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0045" id="bck_fn0045">40</a>) Controversy marked La Guardia's short tenure at UNRRA. He wanted to
      assure that relief operations would continue at a time when they were becoming burdensome to American policy
      makers. He displeased Washington with his policy of political blindness in distributing aid. La Guardia refused
      to use UNRRA to punish advances by communist parties in eastern Europe. When he testified before the Second
      Committee he took part in a lively debate with the U.S. representative, Adlai Stevenson, about principles that
      should govern the postwar economic order.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      La Guardia came to the General Assembly to advocate <a id="page_31"></a>the creation of international agencies to
      continue UNRRA's work after it ceased operation in 1947.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0046" id="bck_fn0046">41</a>) He wanted those ongoing organizations to be guided by what he believed were
      UNRRA<sup class="item2">1</sup> s principles. Those included a view of nations as collections of individuals
      sharing culturally distinct means of meeting common human economic needs. While people might consent out of
      conviction, indifference, or fear to different sorts of governments, a nation's form of government (and its
      sort of economic policies) could be ignored when evaluating the extent of its economic needs. To do otherwise,
      for La Guardia, would be to violate the U.N. Charter.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0047" id="bck_fn0047">42</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In 1946 La Guardia saw the world's greatest economic needs in central Europe where many people actually
      starved or had no shelter. As soon as international efforts had met those needs, other jobs would become more
      important. La Guardia felt international organizations should then begin to focus on regions of the world where
      the next most crucial human needs existed, the war-devastated areas outside Europe. Even after these areas were
      rebuilt, international aid would still be needed. La Guardia called the next most crucial needs the ones for
      "public works projects and industrialization" in what in those days were called "backward"
      nations.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0048" id="bck_fn0048">43</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      La Guardia felt this ongoing system of international aid should always be financed by the more advantaged
      nations. Given the deep poverty of many in Europe in 1946, it struck him as appropriate that UNRRA's funds
      came from all other parts of the world, including from the Latin American states which he noted gave especially
      generously relative to their wealth. In the future La Guardia hoped that those nations themselves would be
      recipients of aid. He hoped that other U.N. agencies governed by these principles would be created, a
      children's fund and a basic relief agency.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0049" id="bck_fn0049">44</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Stevenson adamantly rejected La Guardia's proposals on two grounds. "The U.S.," the official U.N.
      summary of his speech says, "could not participate in a plan based on a principle of mandatory
      allocation," like the one UNRRA was suppose to have followed. The U.S. rejected the idea that every state
      owes something to the economic development of all less advantaged states. Moreover, the U.S. rejected the idea
      that any aid it happened to offer — out of charity or in line with national interests should be allocated by a
      multilateral agency on the basis of that agency's judgement of "need." According to Stevenson, for
      efficiency's sake alone donor nations had the right to expect political and economic conditions to be met by
      recipients of aid. "Delays and inequitable distribution" would result from international management of
      aid because governments with no material interest in the productive use of funds, governments other than the
      donor and recipient, would have influence over transactions.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0050" id="bck_fn0050">45</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
<a id="page_32"></a>La Guardia argued that Stevenson's rejection reflected a selfish American desire to limit
      its aid commitments in hopes that it could get political advantages from doing what was only its duty:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      If the U.S. is a country of great resources it should be remembered that God made its citizens trustees of His
      bounty. Citizens of the U.S. are naturally generous and would disapprove of any plan requiring a country to
      humiliate itself in return for assistance.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0051" id="bck_fn0051">46</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      La Guardia's notion of the ethic that should guide international assistance never became a guide for American
      aid policy nor did many American citizens ever complain about the strings attached to American aid promises.
      Observers at the time did credit La Guardia with convincing U.N. delegates to approve of UNICEF,(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0052" id="bck_fn0052">47</a>) but UNRRA itself was disbanded and not replaced by another
      U.N. agency with the same operational ideology. And even though the World Bank began to lend money to less
      developed countries at the time La Guardia had suggested it would become appropriate, after the critical poverty
      in the war torn countries had been allieviated, the bank adopted criteria other than "need" for
      allocating its resources.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The significance of La Guardia's testimony comes from the way leaders with objections to the postwar regimes
      adopted UNRRA's ethic to justify their grievances. La Guardia had outlined a moral justification for
      multilateral economic aid programs which Asian and Latin American officials then joined to traditional notions of
      sovereignty to create a summary of the basic economic rights and duties of states. They linked that ethic through
      the UNRRA precedent to the U.N. Charter. The precedent also let them argue that the powerful nations had once
      accepted the new ethic as legitmate, at least when UNRRA and the U.N. were created. The ethic sanctioned both
      national regulation of trade -- as a reflection of sovereign economic rights — and demands for economic aid to
      the third world that would have no political or economic conditions.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      As early as 1946 southern spokesman justified the reforms they wanted with this ethic. They used their principle
      the same way American free trade advocates used theirs. The new interpretation of the economic rights and duties
      of states validated only one set of policies designed to achieve the internationally agreed upon goal of
      increasing production while precluding others on moral grounds. Southern spokesmen first used their view to
      justify U.N. technical assistance programs to "backward countries;" then to explain why it was right to
      create U.N. economic commissions for Latin America, Asia, and the Middle East; and finally to argue for the
      creation of <a id="page_33"></a>a Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development (SUNFED), all before 1960.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      There is a certain neatness in these principles, at least for governments that want international approval for
      their trade regulations as well as international support for their development programs. If, in the late 1940s,
      the governments that had both of these interests had adopted either of the two other available sets of
      principles, their interests would not have been as well served.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Keynes's principle that international economic relations should be governed by policies chosen on their
      economic merits alone would have demanded that national development programs be subject to international
      monitoring and evaluation. The south's proposed economic rights and duties of states gave national
      governments primary jurisdiction in deciding development goals and evaluating the success of their own
      development plans. Keynes's principles might have forced some national governments to adopt economic
      development programs which destroyed their indigenous cultural bases of support in the name of economic
      efficiency, something no government would knowingly do. By referring to the economic rights and duties of states,
      the government of a country that received aid could protect any traditional national social institution from the
      impact of foreign aid, whether that institution be as irrelevant to economic efficiency as local habits of dress
      or as significant as the power structure traditionally supporting the government.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      References to older notions of national sovereignty could have justified southern refusal to accept conditional
      international aid, but older views would not have justified the southern premise that aid should be forthcoming
      in the first place. The UNRRA precedent, and La Guardia's view of the UNRRA and U.N. Charter principles,
      provided that premise.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      It would be incorrect to assume that the support "backward" nations gave to UNRRA interpretations of
      the rights and duties of states was merely "ideological" in the pejorative sense of the term. Certainly
      their shared interests "ideologically" constrained their choice among available principles. The less
      industrialized nations could have chosen no other available principles as long as they wanted to maintain their
      old interest in using some trade restrictions and still pursue their new interest in exploiting the opportunities
      available in an international system in which, for the first time, most nations accepted that it was a duty of
      wealthier states to aid at least some types of poorer states. Acceptance of their principles would mean that,
      after European reconstruction, the "backward" states would be the only rightful recipients of material
      aid; nevertheless, nothing the less industrialized states did at the time <a id="page_34"></a>suggests that they
      masked any other purposes when they adopted their principles, nor do any of their actions suggest that they
      adopted these principles without sincerity.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In assessing southern motives we must remember that in 1946 the distinctions between rich and poor nations, as
      well as the equation of the absence of poverty and the presence of wealth with economic development that we
      commonly accept today, were not so clear. When the Brazilian delegate rose during the first year's debate in
      the Second Committee to propose a U.N. technical assistance program to Latin America and Asia for the first time,
      he represented a country that had given 1 percent of its previous year's production to European recovery, a
      country that due to its overall wealth and in spite of the poverty of most of its people and its
      "backwardness" (lack of industry) Cordell Hull had wanted to make a permanent member of the Security
      Council. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0053" id="bck_fn0053">48</a>) When the Mexican delegate proposed the
      establishment of a U.N. economic commission for Latin America, modeled on one already in the works for Europe,
      and justified financing his proposal out of general revenues on the basis of U.N. Charter duties of states to aid
      other states in developing economic plans, he represented a country that, like many other Latin American
      countries, had given around .3 percent of its income to the poor in Europe during the previous year.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0054" id="bck_fn0054">49</a>) India's general proposals for international
      cooperation to assure worldwide industrialization, raised the next year, were championed by a representative who
      had reason to believe that his country's use of sterling as national reserve, rather than some stronger
      medium, represented a major sacrifice to aid British recovery, especially after British postwar devaluations had
      cut India's reserves almost in half.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0055" id="bck_fn0055">50</a>) In the
      earliest years of the United Nations, the governments that said that all nations had duties to aid the economic
      development of poorer nations could point to their own example of adherence to that principle.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In the late forties and throughout the fifties the south employed their new principles the most persistently when
      arguing for the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development. In 1949 India's V. K. R. V. Rao
      submitted an outline of such a fund to a U.N. commission he then headed. Little more was done with the proposal
      that year.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0056" id="bck_fn0056">51</a>) While nothing was heard about it on the
      floor of the General Assembly, Lebanon's George Hakim spoke extensively about a similar proposal to the
      Second Committee.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0057" id="bck_fn0057">52</a>) He outlined the need for the fund
      in terms of the limitations of the World Bank. The bank, as originally constituted, had to give assistance to
      projects that would have predictable, direct economic returns; the institutions was, after all, a bank. It loaned
      money and expected repayment with interest. The <a id="page_35"></a>bank did not have money for infrastructure
      projects building roads and ports, for example -- that, in themselves, would not provide returns. In its early
      years the bank rarely provided funds for what La Guardia had called the "public works projects" needed
      in less industrialized countries.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      All the early arguments for SUNFED linked the fund to that need and even to exact language and arguments used to
      support La Guardia's position during the very first meetings of the Second Committee. Hakim's first
      speech paraphrased a speech made by Roberto de Oliveira Campos a year earlier. In that speech the Brazilian
      delegate had mixed praise for existing U.N. technical assistance programs; he considered them worthwhile as the
      "only things the U.N. can do" for less industrialized countries because the World Bank had yet to
      provide significant loans to any of them and because UNRRA had been disbanded.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0058" id="bck_fn0058">53</a>) Campos's speech, in turn, reiterated the 1946 debate in which the Brazilian
      delegate had first proposed U.N. technical assistance as a program justified by the charter's sections on
      economic development as embodied in UNRRA and in which the Argentine delegate, after noting the size of his
      country's contribution to European recovery, had proposed that making UNRRA a permanent international
      organization would be the best way to institutionalize the organization's view of evolving development
      needs.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0059" id="bck_fn0059">54</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Rao's and Hakim's proposals, and all the subsequent southern proposals based on them, were opposed by
      most developed states for years. In the end the U.N. institutionalized them only in part, through the creation of
      a small Special Fund that the U.S. proposed as a compromise.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0060" id="bck_fn0060">55</a>) In addition the World Bank created a facility which would provide loans to
      infrastructure projects in countries with little industry, the International Development Association
      (IDA).(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0061" id="bck_fn0061">56</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Two days after Hakim made his proposal in 1949, his colleague from Turkey proposed another type of international
      capital assistance, the provision of funds to private corporations through a World Bank International Finance
      Corporation (IFC) to encourage foreign investment in poorer nations. The IFC could be more easily reconciled to
      the dominant ideology's concerns with private enterprise than could SUNFED, so it was adopted much more
      quickly and completely. Nonetheless, despite the fact that the IFC could have been justified under the dominant
      ideology, the delegate who first proposed it to the Second Committee did just what Hakim had done. He pointed to
      the precedent of U.N. technical assistance and to the aid duties suggested in the southern view of the U.N.
      Charter. Ultimately, the Turkish representative linked the duty of wealthy states to provide the funds through
      which the IFC would insure private investment to responsibilities incumbent upon the rich just because of <a id="page_36"></a>their wealth. For him aid was "not charity" but an affirmation of the unity of
      mankind.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0062" id="bck_fn0062">57</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In the early fifties the south also combined the suggestion that resource owners had a duty to use their
      resources for the good of all with the issues of foreign investment in another way to create the most
      controversial application of their principles that they made before 1960. Wealthy market states firmly rejected
      this application even though it implied that poorer states had economic duties that most had never before
      conceded.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This controversial application first appeared in 1952 during the debates over the Universal Declaration of Human
      Rights. The Chilean representative, applying the south's new principles, proposed that states had the right
      of sovereignty over their natural resources. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0063" id="bck_fn0063">58</a>) DMC
      delegates correctly interpreted this statement as implying that governments had the right to set the level of
      compensation for property seized from foreign nationals. In that form the notion had a long tradition,
      particularly in relations between the United States and Latin American governments. Latin American lawyers first
      developed the idea specifically as a justification for compensating nationalized American extractive firms at
      levels lower than both the firms and the U.S. government thought fair. Throughout the twentieth century few Latin
      American governments had ever announced exceptions to this principle; even though all quietly accepted levels of
      compensation dictated by international arbitration and foreign governments, they always emphasized they had the
      right not to do so.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0064" id="bck_fn0064">59</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Raising the principle of a state's right to control its resources under the broader principles of the
      economic rights and duties of states added a new element, however. Advocates of the principle proposed that while
      a nation had a right to choose how its resources were to be used it also had a duty to choose a way to use those
      resources that would benefit people throughout the world. When southern delegates such as the Chilean
      representative raised this point in the 1950s, DMC representatives considered it to be little more than a
      meaningless rhetorical flourish. Hindsight suggests that wealthy states missed a chance at the beginning of the
      New International Economic Order debate to set guidelines for the responsible use of natural resources that would
      have been useful to the north in the mid-seventies when southern oil owners helped make the NIEO appear new
      again.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In contrast to the north's failure to call upon the south to consistently recognize the limits on national
      action imposed by their new principles, the less developed states did call upon each other to demonstrate their
      complete adherence to their new principles very early on. Such demonstrations helped to strengthen the very loose
      southern coalition. From the mid-fifties <a id="page_37"></a>onward further development of the emerging ideology
      went hand in hand with new concrete steps toward a formal third world alliance.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Treaties between India and China in the fifties initiated this trend. Those treaties provided a new, deeper level
      of moral justification for the rights and duties of states the south demanded. Five principles of peaceful
      coexistence framed the first major treaty after the Chinese revolution between the new government and India.
      Nehru would dub these the "<span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span>"
      following Sukarno's use of this Sanskrit translation of "five principles" to identify the moral
      bases for his government in Indonesia. The two sets of five principles were similar. The international
      <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span>, in the most limited interpretation,
      recognize the rights of states to have different economic and political systems. In that sense, an American legal
      scholar correctly identifies them as the old wine of European ideas about the rights of sovereignties placed in
      an eastern bottle with a Sanskrit label.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0065" id="bck_fn0065">60</a>) But from
      the very beginning those who affirmed the <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span> illustrated that that the principles meant much more.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Asian nations with radically different internal economies first used those principles to frame pledges of mutual
      aid. They said that the minimal duty of states toward one another was mutual noninterference in their internal
      affairs, i.e., mutual acceptance of differences, and that all further cooperation must continue to develop on
      that basis. Ethical international economic aid programs, for example, could only be aimed at assuring the success
      of the unique economic system that the recipient had chosen. And the <span class="underline">Panch</span>
<span class="underline">Shila</span> affirmed that the path toward international unity was through diversity. In
      the first instance, the <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span> justified what,
      to minds schooled in the cold war Ideas of the industrialized states, seems to be an impossible pledge of Indian
      aid to help China develop its radically socialist economy in exchange for helping develop the mixed, but still
      fundamentally capitalist, economy of India.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0066" id="bck_fn0066">61</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      As subsequent Sino-Indian relations illustrate, it is difficult for states with different national economic
      ideologies and long standing disputes to consistently maintain cooperation under the <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span>. But recognition of that fact should not tempt us
      to ignore the political importance of those principles. With inconsequential modifications they have been
      included in all the key agreements among third world countries that became the background for the New
      International Economic Order proposals.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0067" id="bck_fn0067">62</a>) Those
      agreements never demanded the impossible achievement of complete economic integration between states with
      fundamentally different economic doctrines. Rather, they demanded efforts of good faith aimed at identifying and
      fostering those parts of the <a id="page_38"></a>economic systems within each country that could be uniquely
      developed. Those who affirm the <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span> have
      criticized both socialists and liberals, but only those socialists and liberals who seem convinced that such a
      good faith effort across systems is immoral or pointless.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Respect for cultural differences underlies both the <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span> and La Guardia's interpretation of UNRAA and U.N. Charter principles. When Sukarno
      used the Sanskrit words to label principles for Indonesian government he made a similar point quite clear. He
      contrasted "cosmopolitanism" to the "internationalism" expressed by <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span>. "Cosmopolitans" believe that
      international cooperation, as well as national integration, develop as differences between people are abolished,
      when people from different cultures come to share the same family customs, economic systems, language,
      philosophy, and government. "Internationalists" hold the view that cooperation develops when
      collaboration aids the unique concerns of each culture.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0068" id="bck_fn0068">63</a>) Similar distinctions could be made between different views of how to develop
      cooperative social relations in a large multiethnic city, like New York. On the one hand, some say cities should
      serve as melting pots, bringing people from cultures foreign to each other together into a single culture. Others
      argue that cultural diversity strengthens a city and that urban government should foster tolerance of diversity
      and further cooperation building on that tolerance and preserving that diversity. La Guardia, of course,
      advocated the latter view more than the former.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0069" id="bck_fn0069">64</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The importance of this view to international economic relations may have little to do with the fact that these
      ideas were developed by leaders of multiethnic communities. Clearly global economic management involves
      collaboration among people from very different cultures, so that an ethic based on recognition of that fact may
      be more relevant than one which ignores cultural diversity. But to guide actual management of the global economy,
      such an ethic would have to be more clearly defined than it was, at least in the early days of the third world
      alliance. It would have to pinpoint those elements of "culture" which are to be tolerated, preserved,
      and strengthened by cooperation. In most multicultural polities, including India, Indonesia, and New York City,
      leaders have simultaneously used both "internationalist" and "cosmopolitan" ethics to justify
      particular parts of the government's program.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0070" id="bck_fn0070">65</a>)
      The global political importance of the "internationalist" ethic stems from the fact that it provided a
      further level of ethical grounding for the south's view of the economic rights and duties of states. And
      unlike their view of the rights and duties, the south's "internationalism" could be directly
      contrasted with an element of the dominant ideology, the "cosmopolitanism" which serves as a deeper
      level of <a id="page_39"></a>justification for the Bretton Woods system.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Many social scientists are already familiar with the "internationalist" arguments against Bretton
      Woods. American scholars' frequent "critiques of liberalism" in the 1960s and 1970s focused on the
      same pattern of beliefs that Sukarno called "cosmopolitanism" in the fifties. Robert Packenham in
      <span class="underline">Liberal America and the Third World</span> does a particularly good job of illustrating
      the prevalence of those beliefs among scholars and policy makers responsible for U.S. aid programs since
      Truman's Point Four speech.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0071" id="bck_fn0071">66</a>) But in his critique
      of U.S. foreign policy Garry Wills has probably appropriated the most apt name for the cluster of beliefs,
      "universalism," the conviction that the economic and political goals and policies which have proven to
      be appropriate for one nation — in particular, American economic liberalism — are appropriate for the rest of the
      world. From this universalist point of view, international cooperation builds in stages as more nations accept
      "universal" policies held to be worthwhile for all.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0072" id="bck_fn0072">67</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Sukarno and other third world leaders in the fifties did not have the insights of later social scientists to
      guide them when they perceived that "cosmopolitanism" was prevalent and harmful to their interests.
      They did have their instructive experience with the new Bretton Woods system. Taken together, the charters of the
      IMF, World Bank, and GATT affirmed that international cooperation would develop as states accepted the principles
      of limited intergovernmental intervention in the world economy and the goal of free trade. U.S. and World Bank
      policies of excluding many socialist countries from the aid system demonstrated that the emerging global regimes
      were little concerned with cooperation that might be based upon fostering fundamental differences between states.
      Many of the framers of the postwar system refused to tolerate fundamental differences in economic policy. The men
      who most influenced the policies of the emerging system believed that, ". . . free enterprise is, or
      eventually will be, universal."(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0073" id="bck_fn0073">68</a>5 They linked
      this view to the one we have already seen Stevenson express, that bilateral aid was more efficient than
      multilateral aid because the wealth of the donors — their mere ability to give aid — provided prima facie
      evidence that they had discovered effective economic policies. The donors' wealth suggested that any
      restrictions they might place on the use of aid funds would, in fact, make development more efficient. The
      dominant ideology held that there was one best way to develop.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In a complementary view, throughout the 1950s both the U.S. government and the World Bank explained the
      south's lack of economic development in terms of local "cultural" constraints:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      . . . lack of traditions of political responsi<a id="page_40"></a>bility, weakness of economic initiative . . .
      and insufficient understanding that economic progress requires patience, effort, and self-denial.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0074" id="bck_fn0074">69</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_noindent">
      While the U.S. government and the bank demanded changes in these "cultural attributes" as preconditions
      for the international cooperation that aid funds represented, third world governments demanded toleration and
      encouragement of many of the same habits the donors wished to abolish. Southern officials, of course, had very
      different names for the same habits referred to in the above quotation from the bank's 1953 <span class="underline">Annual</span> <span class="underline">Report.</span>
</div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Even earlier evidence of the significance of this univeralist idea can be cited. The apparent U.S. policy of
      encouraging international agreement on the postwar institutions by bringing up the least controversial items
      first also reflected American universalist beliefs: Without recognizing the right of every state to have a
      different sort of economy, the United States encouraged the widest possible agreement among governments only
      because those agreements reflected goals and policies which the American experience had proven to be valuable.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In refusing to accept the American experience -- or any other model -- as a guide for all economic development,
      third world governments affirmed that a country's economic system should reflect its cultural history and,
      thus, should be part of its unique culture, a culture which not only had a right to exist, but which other states
      had a duty to foster. In addition, third world governments acted as if the only valid interpretation of a
      country's culture was the government's own. This assumption linked third world
      "internationalism" back to the economic rights and duties of states. It suggested another principle,
      maintaining the world's cultural diversity, as a value to be fostered by the global economic system. The
      conflict between "internationalists" affirming the need for cultural diversity, on the one hand, and
      "cosmopolitans" affirming economic policies they held to be universally valid, on the other, became one
      of the deepest, and least discussed, divisions underlying the current north-south conflict.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The south's increasingly complex moral position did more than help LDC governments understand their conflict
      of interest with the north. It allowed them to create an unusually broad alliance. In a sense, it gave prior
      moral justification for the inevitable disagreements that the members in the vast alliance would have. It
      provided a cooperative way to accept those differences.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      National economic and political ideologies never became a threat to the alliance because the third world's
      moral principles provided a nest of justifications for those differences. When cooperation developed between
      third world states with conflicting national development <a id="page_41"></a>ideologies -- like Keynesian
      liberalism and Leninism — leaders of those countries could pursue their cooperation without cognitive
      inconsistency by referring to the principle that "international cooperation develops on the basis of mutual
      recognition of cultural differences." Conflicting development ideologies just reflected different national
      cultures. When everyone was aware that the actual differences were less "cultural" than ideological,
      the cooperating governments could invoke the "right of states to choose their own development path."
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Those who apply the shared third world ideology the most masterfully, Tanzania's President Julius Nyerere for
      example, also recognize that one deeper justification for "maintaining cultural diversity" is the fact
      that the knowledge embodied in every society is limited. Thus, it is in each society's own interest to
      support the very different plans made by societies that share only some of its goals. The knowledge embodied in
      the foreign culture may turn out to be helpful to you later. Nyerere, once one of his generation's most
      sincere and articulate spokesmen for democratic socialism, has no trouble praising the antisocialist development
      plans of a third world ally like the Ivory Coast or even accepting (at least for a while) the antidemocratic
      political system established by his much closer allies in Zanzibar.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0075" id="bck_fn0075">70</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The nest of southern justifications for cooperation between states holding different views is so deep that
      members of the southern alliance have only rarely had to invoke the condescending expedient that most states with
      "universalist" ideologies use to explain why they cooperate with states that ignore their views. Third
      world states rarely have had to argue that their allies' views are "appropriate at this time"
      because of the allies' present (presumably, lower) state of economic or cultural development in the way the
      democratic U.S. sometimes argues for its authoritarian allies' views and the way the socialist Soviet Union
      sometimes argues for its nonsocialist friends' systems.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0014"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0014">Third World Industrial Development</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      In order to maintain cooperation under their extremely flexible moral framework, Asian, African, and Latin
      American states had to share some fundamental goals. To last as long as it has, southern cooperation had to based
      on something more than the habit that reinforced the southern desire to continue trade restrictions after the war
      or the opportunism that contributed to the first southern calls for international aid. In addition the
      south's basic goals had to be ones that international regimes could be designed to achieve even though the
      Bretton Woods institutions did not accept them.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
<a id="page_42"></a>The goals institutionalized by the Bretton Woods regimes in the late forties were simple and
      few: Expanding global trade and production and thus, according to many of the regimes' advocates, removing
      the preconditions for the world wars. Advocates of the earliest proposals for technical assistance to Latin
      American and Asian countries even justified that policy with the argument that the reconstruction of Europe and
      the expansion of world trade desired by all would be quickened if LDC agricultural surpluses could reach port
      more easily; technical assistance in improving internal transportation, they argued, would help expand global
      trade and production.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0076" id="bck_fn0076">71</a>) But even when they referred to
      expanding global trade and production as reasons for the reforms they proposed, southern spokesman also talked
      about the goal of industrializing the economies of "backward" nations. They discussed that goal more
      frequently and feverently.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Just as American State Department justifications for free trade rested upon both a moral theory and an economic,
      southern insistence upon internationally supported industrialization had the same dual ideological underpinning.
      The principles of states' economic rights and duties said it was the duty of industrial nations to aid the
      industrialization of any LDC that chose industrialization as its development path, even if that might not be the
      most efficient way to expand global production. In addition, governments supporting industrialization argued that
      it was, in fact, the most effective way to achieve maximum growth.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Since the free trade theories underlying the postwar system considered specialization rather than
      industrialization to be the most effective development policy conflict over goals between followers of the
      dominant ideology and those who invented the new alternative was inevitable. At the ITO conferences Latin
      American and Asian officials aimed their proposals for restrictive trade practices toward industrialization. To
      American ITO negotiator Clair Wilcox, southern emphasis on industrialization was a "fetish." Even if
      some countries that had not been industrialized before the war did have some sort of comparative advantage in
      producing some industrial lines, only an open world economy would encourage the foreign capital investment that
      would provide the most efficient way to develop that advantage. Such was the lesson of free trade theory.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0077" id="bck_fn0077">72</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Unlike Wilcox, some Asians and Latin Americans began their analysis with the Keynesian fear that industrial
      monopolies would choose the conservative, but still profitable, strategy of investing where they had invested
      before in lieu of searching out more profitable investments in the "backward" countries. Others just
      began their analysis with the observation that industrial countries and regions were always richer than
      culturally <a id="page_43"></a>similar regions and nations without industry.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nineteen forty-five saw the publication of two major statistical studies highlighting this fact, one by the
      League of Nations, the other by the Oxford statistical institute. The league report advocated industrialization
      in LDCs not for import substitution, as had been the policy in many Latin American states since the 1920s, but to
      raise employment levels and supplement, rather than replace, products imported. The league report suggested that
      if richer countries helped poorer ones industrialize, the poor would have more with which to buy things from the
      rich. Trade would increase.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0078" id="bck_fn0078">73</a>) The Oxford report
      reached some of the same conclusions. Poor nations had to industrialize in order to abolish disguised rural
      unemployment. A free trade system without special programs to industrialize the "backward" regions
      would just maintain an existing, destructive global division of labor and wealth.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0079" id="bck_fn0079">74</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      After the U.N. created economic commissions for the developing regions, authoritative analysis praising
      industrialization became commonplace. Developments in economic analysis quickened the international debate. In
      the autumn of 1948, after the Havana conference, Latin American delegates in the General Assembly thanked the new
      international professional staffs for improving the analysis which favored their goal. These staffs had already
      gone beyond the simple correlation that people in industrial nations were richer to work toward an explanation.
      They called underemployment — habitual part time work and inefficiently done work — the cause of underdevelopment
      in the nonindustrial nations. The Oxford study had already said as much. The U.N. added that LDCs specialized in
      high-underemployment, nonindustrial products only as a result of colonialism.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0080" id="bck_fn0080">75</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Reports of the Second Committee's annual debate in 1948 demonstrate that as soon as industrialization became
      an openly discussed topic, the ideological split between north and south became obvious. Misunderstanding
      abounded. At one point the Colombian delegate requested that the U.N. investigate why underemployment and low
      wages typified agricultural countries. The American delegate responded that the request was foolish. Low wages
      just implied unproductive labor; no study needed to be undertaken to show that. But the Colombian was searching
      for some other explanation. He probably would have accepted the thesis that industrial techniques themselves
      raised productivity and hence, as further consequence, could help raise wages. He may even have wanted a report
      that actually explained the origins of low wages in poorer countries rather than discussing something correlated
      ("low productivity") or suggesting a cure ("industrialization"). Given that he already
      believed in industrialization as the cure, he probably just wanted his thesis authoritatively affirmed. In <a id="page_44"></a>contrast, the American delegate's immediate thought about "low productivity" could be
      made part of a real (although questionable) explanation for low wages in poorer countries. To understand his
      view, we would need to link it to the American ideas about "cultural impediments" to development that
      were so popular at the time: people in poorer countries received low wages because they did not produce much;
      they did not produce much because their cultures did not value work.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0081" id="bck_fn0081">76</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Whether primarily as a result of requests like Colombia's or because of his own research inclination, Raul
      Prebisch of the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA) worked throughout 1948 on a study that would offer a
      different explanation.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0082" id="bck_fn0082">77</a>) Prebisch suggested that the
      global division between a "core" of colonial and former colonial powers engaged in manufacturing, and a
      "periphery" of former colonies and colonies producing primary products be considered analytically
      important. He wanted to explain the low wages and disguised unemployment in the periphery, and he wanted to
      explain why prices of manufactured goods in international trade tended to rise (as he believed they did) and the
      prices of primary commodities remained constant or fell.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      He offered an eminently Keynesian explanation, reflecting his background. It rested upon the powers he assumed
      large firms, unions, and national governments had to enforce decisions based on their parochial interests.
      According to Prebisch, unions and firms in industrial nations had the power to assure that what they received for
      their products could not decline. Production of raw materials involved no global unions. No raw material
      producers acted like monopolies. They competed with each other. Even whole nations dependent on the sale of a
      single commodity usually had many other major competitors. The price they received for their goods could, and did
      at times, go down. Declining LDC terms of trade with rich countries resulted. The decline meant that remuneration
      to the firms and workers producing southern exports could not grow. Moreover, peripheral economies found it hard
      to save money to invest in new enterprises to absorb the labor released from increasingly unprofitable export
      sectors. Industrialization for import substitution, reducing the need to buy increasingly expensive foreign
      goods, could help the problem. And industrialization of any form would help absorb the unused labor in the LDCs.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Prebisch's analysis later would come under significant attack from all liberal economists, despite his
      Keynesian roots. Frequently critics charge Prebisch with a naive belief that industrialization is a panacea. His
      early work leaves itself open for such criticism. Logically, his analysis points to a need for countervailing
      centers of power in the third world rather than <a id="page_45"></a>an emphasis on industrialization.
      Industrialization was just one of many possible ways to solve that problem of employing the unproductive labor in
      backward countries. Industrialization, in theory, could reduce the dependence of poor countries on products from
      rich countries. But industrialization, in and of itself, would not necessarily increase the relative value of the
      products the south exported.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Most countries had already chosen industrialization as their first economic goal long before Prebisch published
      his ideas. It is hardly surprising that he would have discussed such policies or that his policy proposals for
      industrialization became the first part of his thesis adopted by third world governments. For a very long time,
      though, southern officials ignored the powers to set prices that firms and unions in industrial countries had.
      Instead, Prebisch's ideas first appeared in intergovernmental debate when LDCs discussed the economic effects
      of the rich countries' cold war "strategic stockpiling" policies.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Rearmament in the 1950s, while temporarily driving up the prices of raw materials as wealthy states purchased
      goods for their stockpiles, drove up the prices of technologically sophisticated industrial products even faster.
      In 1950, Brazil suggested that rearmament was really being undertaken for economic rather than strategic reasons
      s Rich market countries armed in order to maintain high, wartime levels of employment, a goal the Brazilian
      government felt could just as easily have been met by increasing production in order to help other countries
      industrialize.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0083" id="bck_fn0083">78</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Throughout the four following years southern governments became increasingly disturbed over the military
      competition among wealthy states. They forecasted inevitable declines in the prices of raw materials beginning as
      soon as wealthy nations began to sell from their strategic stockpiles. Early on Egypt made the position shared by
      other southern nations clear. Invoking the economic rights and duties of states especially as they apply to those
      who own resources, an Egyptian U.N. delegate said that if rich nations wanted to stockpile goods or sell from
      their stockpiles that was their perogative. But their duties to the other nations made it incumbent upon them to
      also fix the prices of industrial goods through similar government involvement in the market. "An
      equilibrium must be established between the prices of raw materials and the prices of industrial products."
      Commodity agreements and long term contracts could provide that balance.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0084" id="bck_fn0084">79</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Cold war competition affected southern views about aid as just a much as about trade. The cold war intensified
      the free market bias of the Bretton Woods institutions and restricted available economic aid. The World Bank
      <span class="underline">Annual Report</span> of 1951 used the rearmament of <a id="page_46"></a>"free
      nations" as an explicit reason for demanding that underdeveloped countries increase their production of raw
      materials rather than be concerned with industrialization. The bank, thus, reinforced the specialization argument
      with considerations of strategic politics.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0085" id="bck_fn0085">80</a>) Of
      course, after Truman's point four speech the World Bank was not the only source of aid funds that the south
      hoped might be used for industrialization. Other nations even joined the U.S. in establishing bilateral programs
      as the cold war intensified. This aid, of course, was designed to achieve strategic objectives. Southern economic
      goals were not always congruent with such objectives. Moreover, in the 1950s wealthy nations frequently diverted
      promised economic aid to their own or their recipient's military purposes in order to achieve the higher
      goals at stake in the cold war.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      India's powerful foreign minister in the 1950s, Krishna Menon, explains that African and Asian governments
      called the 1955 Bandung conference in order to share such frustrations with aid programs linked to strategic
      objectives.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0086" id="bck_fn0086">81</a>) The conference adopted the <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shi</span>la as guidelines for future Afro-Asian relations and
      argued for the entire range of economic reforms that other southern forums had discussed since the war. At the
      time of the Bandung conference northern writers began to use the term "third world" to describe these
      nations that were determined to stay out of the cold war competition.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0087" id="bck_fn0087">82</a>) The name stuck. Along with the <span class="underline">Panch Shila</span>, the idea
      of the "third world" defined the new alliance outside the cold war as a set of nations whose economies
      should be aided by the international community, yet from whom no state should demand political concessions.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Meanwhile, within the General Assembly the same nations' frustrated interest in creating an international aid
      system not linked to the wealthy states' security goals focused debate on reforms that involved much more
      than changing language. Third world officials continued to say that multilateral aid was preferable to bilateral
      aid because multilateral institutions would be less likely to try to serve both economic and strategic goals with
      the same policy.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Of course, wealthy nations never made support of their cold war positions the only criteria for granting aid,
      even in the 1950s. They also based their policies on economic analysis designed to identify optimal growth
      policies. Not surprisingly, the analysis preferred by the poorer recipients and the wealthiest donors continued
      to differ throughout the decade. But in the fifties, when the science of development economics was in its
      infancy, north-south disagreements were less dramatic than the rhetoric of the the 1980s might make us think. In
      fact, through the decade the views of poor aid recipients and rich donors began to converge. Even the U.S.
      government <a id="page_47"></a>demoted "specialization" from the central position in its growth
      doctrine. The U.S. began to talk about the more central roles of foreign investment and technical assistance.
      Third world analysis remained distinct from that preferred by most donors in only two ways: The third world saw
      colonialism as the source of their underdevelopment and always saw industrialization as part of the cure.
      Nevertheless, in the 1950s aid donors and recipients shared the same discourse about hypothetical ways to
      eradicate underdevelopment.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      What assured that development economists as different as (say) a laissez faire advisor to the U.S. government and
      a Soviet-trained planner would share common ground was the fact that there usually existed a developing country
      trying to follow a development plan influenced by both of their theories. Three examples illustrate both the
      unity and the diversity within the early "development" discourse.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      First, in the early 1950s the Indian government requested that British Marxist Maurice Dobb report to them on the
      Soviet experience with central planning. Then the Indians grafted central planning upon their essentially
      capitalistic development program.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0088" id="bck_fn0088">83</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In a second example, many Latin American nations continued to follow import substitution policies, condemning the
      powers of foreign extractive enterprises and promoting more equal income distribution with land reforms in the
      countryside while allowing individuals in that part of the industrial sector controlled by nationals to
      accumulate vast wealth. Paradoxically, the property-protecting, free enterprise Americans encouraged land
      redistribution in Latin America and in other parts of the third world.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0089" id="bck_fn0089">84</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Finally, from the time of the first major public discussion of his development ideas Caribbean economist W.
      Arthur Lewis had a major impact on development planning, especially in Africa. He called for foreign investment
      and expropriation of the surpluses generated by farmers, all in order to assure industrialization.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0090" id="bck_fn0090">85</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Needless to say, none of these would easily fit into the categories created by the "free enterprise"
      versus "planning" dicotomy. And the only elements these doctrines clearly share are their emphasis on
      industrialization and their compatibility with an actively managed international economic system dedicated to the
      extended principles of states' economic rights and duties.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In addition to the unity and diversity of third world development plans, one other factor unified early
      development economics: Much of it was invented within the United Nations. While economists working within the
      U.N. all shared an interest in identifying how international programs could aid third world development, the
      diversity of approaches advocated outside international organizations was replicated within. For example, while
      <a id="page_48"></a>Gunnar Myrdal of the Economic Commission for Europe shared Prebisch's interest in
      "structures" that could be historically linked to colonialism and which continued to impede
      development, he wrote about things like poor education, health, and transportation systems and domestic income
      inequalities rather than speaking of the unequal distribution around the globe of power over prices. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0091" id="bck_fn0091">86</a>) Myrdal pointed to a need for international aid programs
      like SUNFED. He did not point to a specific need for international pricing agreements. In contrast, W. W. Rostow,
      who also was connected with the European Commission when he wrote his first book on economic growth, linked poor
      education, transportation, and economic systems to "cultural impediments to development" — opposition
      to science (including liberal economic science), technology, innovation, individual initiative, and even sexual
      sublimation.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0092" id="bck_fn0092">87</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      No NIEO advocates of the 1980s consider Rostow one of the U.N. economists of the fifties who influenced the
      emergence of the new order position, with good reason. Third world officials ignored Rostow's views from the
      beginning because they rested on an explanation of underdevelopment which challenged the principles underlying
      the southern position. Rostow embodied American universalism. His arguments about cultural impediments to
      development implied that there was only one way to develop. While third world states shared one development goal
      — industrialization — throughout the fifties, they continued to affirm that many paths led to that end.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0015"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0015">Completing Bretton Woods and Moving on to
    Development</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      The effects of Rostow's views, nonetheless, exemplify the convergence between north and south that took place
      during the fifties. Views like Rostow's helped convince northern governments at the end of the decade to turn
      from the problems of creating the postwar system to the problems of providing the infrastructure for third world
      development. In the late fifties the north turned away from its own problems, which had triggered interest in
      creating the postwar system in the first place, to some of the third world problems that the postwar system had
      ignored from the beginning.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Histories of the Bretton Woods institutions rarely mention the third world concerns, such as creating the
      infrastructure for industrial development, when considering the fifties. Third world issues did not have to be
      resolved in order for the IMF, World Bank, and GATT to become fully operational.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In the fifties only two things kept the World Bank from operating as it was supposed to, as the world's most
      significant source of funds for development. First, the unexpectedly high cost of European reconstruction had
      <a id="page_49"></a>been borne outside the bank through the Marshall Plan. The bank only became significant in
      its own right as it accumulated capital from its members' annual contributions, which grew as western
      economies grew. Second, the bank needed to develop its own rationale for granting loans, its operational
      ideology.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Even while constrained by the fact that its loans had to be made for profitable projects, during the fifties the
      World Bank developed the ability to fund programs influenced by almost the entire spectrum of opinions on how
      economic growth could be triggered. Nonetheless, the bank continued to encourage potential borrowers to be open
      to foreign investment, to support liberal trade policies, and even to support the strategic interests of the
      DMCs. Yet, even while warning against "premature industrialization," the bank moved toward accepting
      industrialization as a central part of any development program.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Throughout the fifties the bank funded industrial infrastructure and industrial development projects because
      those were the sorts of projects designed by the states whose wealth and (relatively) liberal development
      doctrines appeared to promise that they would be able to repay loans, states like Australia, Italy, Japan, and
      the Nordic countries.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0093" id="bck_fn0093">88</a>) Somewhat unconsciously the
      World Bank developed a "public works" approach that it found hard to extend to the poorer states not
      recognized by the international financial community as good credit risks. Yet, by the end of the decade the bank
      wanted to do just that. By 1958 the bank had commissioned a study of the debt-servicing problems experienced by
      those poorer states that had tried to finance infrastructure projects with short term loans. As the decade
      closed, the bank began to solve the problem. It opened the IDA, the long term, low interest loan facility
      championed by the U.S. in lieu of SUNFED. (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0094" id="bck_fn0094">89</a>) When it
      began to operate the way its founder's intended, the World Bank became, in part, the supporter of public
      works projects and industrialization in the "backward" countries that many who took part in the first
      U.N. debates had hoped it would become.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Unlike the World Bank, the IMF and GATT experienced more sudden breaks in their development. Those clear breaks
      assured that influential northern officials would have the opportunity to completely shift their attention from
      one set of global economic problems to another. That opportunity, in turn, made it possible for northern
      officials to focus on, and give some support to, the sorts of development policies the bank had come to back.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The IMF could only start working normally when most of its members had agreed to let their currencies be freely
      exchanged. Buttressed by their growth in the 1950s and relying, ultimately, on an American promise to convert
      dollars into gold at a fixed rate, most western European nations agreed to make their currencies <a id="page_50"></a>convertible at fixed rates in December of 1958. They removed their national exchange restrictions
      and agreed to live within the IMP rules, to maintain balanced payments and support the relative values of their
      currencies through short term borrowing and economic policies monitored by the IMF.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0095" id="bck_fn0095">90</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The GATT required more than the relative stability and growth of the European economies before it could become
      fully operational. The GATT's only enforcement mechanisms involved requiring each of the contracting parties
      to justify both specific trade restrictions and their trade policy as a whole to the entire membership. The
      membership could then approve or withhold approval of specific restrictions. Prior to 1959 the GATT only heard
      cases involving specific restrictions, without evaluating whole national policies.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0096" id="bck_fn0096">91</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Those precedent setting cases reflected the pragmatic attitude taken by most members. They usually placated the
      wealthier of two parties in a trade dispute. More nations benefited from a wealthy nation's low tariffs than
      from the low tariffs of a poor nation, and the GATT's weak enforcement mechanisms could not induce nations
      with diversified economies to comply. GATT members could only remove trade preferences already granted. For
      example, GATT ruled in favor of the U.S. in a dispute with Czechoslovakia in 1951, establishing the precedent
      that trade restrictions were justified for reasons of national security. In approving the European Coal and Steel
      Community in 1951 and in accepting that West Germany could protect its agricultural sector in 1954, the GATT
      appeared to accept a principle that regional economic development plans provided reason enough for trade
      restrictions — a principle that could be justified under the emerging new order ideology, but not under the
      ideology that designers of the postwar system shared. Nonetheless, in the fifties, the GATT granted few
      exceptions to third world countries who claimed them to be justified by development principles. Third world
      delegates, who remained a minority throughout the decade, often commented on this apparent double
      standard.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0097" id="bck_fn0097">92</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Despite their complaints, third world memoers of GATT did not withdraw. Some changes in the organization through
      the decade clearly helped poorer countries. In particular, the GATT amended its rules in 1956 so that states
      whose exports competed with one another could still demand negotiations to reduce import duties on the product.
      (<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0098" id="bck_fn0098">93</a>) An even more significant, although inadvertent,
      concession to third world interests came in 1955 after it had become abundantly clear that the ITO would never be
      formed. The chief author of the report, free trade theorist Gottfried Haberler, noted that the GATT had not
      promoted fully free trade. He condemned quantitative restrictions on third world agricultural products <a id="page_51"></a>imposed by DMCs in lieu of the tariffs they had reduced under the GATT.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0099" id="bck_fn0099">94</a>) When the report was adopted in 1958, at the same time the GATT became fully
      operational by adopting its procedures to review each member's complete trade policy, it appeared to promise
      increasing north-south cooperation.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Other equally positive portents for north-south cooperation appeared at the end of the fifties. Colonialism
      rapidly ended in all but a few nations; the practice that third world governments had identified as the cause of
      underdevelopment started to disappear. Prosperous European nations; who saw the convertibility of their
      currencies as a rite of passage into the membership in economic system on the same level as the United States,
      took up the call for the economic development of the poorer states. Another sign of that new equality was the
      abolition of the international organization which had coordinated European recovery and the creation of a
      successor organization, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), that would include
      European nations and the U.S. as members with equal rights and responsibilities. In 1959 the Economist
      editorialized that the OECD should become something more than a symbol of the wealthy nations' new equality;
      it should become a real aid agency in recognition of the fact that the problems which led to the creation of the
      postwar economic institutions had been solved and that now, "the biggest fissure in the world at the moment
      is between rich and poor." To encourage debate on ways to meet the challenge, the Economist closed the
      fifties by serializing W. W. Rostow" s new Stages of Growth.(<a href="Ch02.xhtml#fn0100" id="bck_fn0100">95</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Other, less visible, portents contradicted the signs of increasing north-south cooperation perceived and
      reinforced by the <span class="underline">Economist</span> in 1959. We now can see that the maturation of the
      Bretton Woods institutions just signaled the end both of the first phase in the development of the south's
      new ideology and of the first phase in the postwar north-south conflict.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In one sense, Rostow's highly touted work (which became increasingly significant when he entered the American
      government with the Kennedy administration two years later) represented a significant concession to third world
      interests. Its call for aid and its implicit approval of industrialization rather than unending specialization in
      nonindustrial products reflected a significant shift in northern attitudes since the forties. Likewise, the
      reforms in the Bretton Woods system engineered in the fifties — the IDA and IFC, and the new GATT rules -- along
      with the U.N.'s own development programs, equally conceded part of the third world opinion.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      But official opinion in the third world had long since transformed what started as a simple interest in <a id="page_52"></a>industrialization and in using traditional trade policies toward that end into something much more
      complex. Before 1960 the leaders of the third world had come to identify themselves as those excluded from global
      economic decision making, those whose economic need was the greatest, and those who wanted to create a world
      where the cultural integrity of each nation was the basis for, and fostered by, international economic
      cooperation. New ideologies give new identities. Even before 1960 the seeds of the ΝΙΕ0 ideology defined a new
      international identity for the governments of Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
    </div>
<div class="footnote">
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0016"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0016">Notes</a></h2>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0006">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0006">(1)</a>Molinari quoted in the <span class="underline">Economis</span>t, Feb. 21, 1948, p. 308. Wilcox from his <span class="underline">A Charter for
        World Trade</span> (New Yorks: Macmillan, 1949), p. 143.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0007">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0007">(2)</a>Michael Barrett-Brown, <span class="underline">The Economics of
        Imperialism</span> (Baltimores Penguin, 1974), p. 324-25.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0008">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0008">(3)</a>See the discussion of these concerns among American policy
        makers in Fred C. Block, <span class="underline">The Origins of International Economic Disorder</span>
        (Berkeleys Univ. of Calif. Press, 1977 ).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0009">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0009">(4)</a>The most significant work along this line was Albert 0.
        Hirschman's <span class="underline">National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade</span> (Berkeley:
        Univ. of Calif. Press, 1945).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0010">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0010">(5)</a>John Maynard Keynes, <span class="underline">The Economic
        Consequences of the Peace</span> (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Howe, 1920). On the impact of this study see
        Karin Kock, <span class="underline">International Trade and the GATT</span> (Stockholm: Almquist and Wiksell,
        1969), p. 4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0011">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0011">(6)</a>See Lloyd C. Gardner, <span class="underline">Economic Aspects
        of New Deal Diplomacy</span> (Boston: Beacon Press, 1971) and Kock, pp. 14-16.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0012">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0012">(7)</a>Phillip W. Bell, <span class="underline">The Sterling Area in
        the Post-War World</span> (Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1958), pp. 260-63; Bob Fitch and Mary Oppenheimer,
        <span class="underline">Ghana: End of an Illusion</span> (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1966), p. 42.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0013">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0013">(8)</a> United States Department of State Bulletin [hereafter:
        "<span class="underline">DSOB"]</span> May 3, 1941 and Gardner, p. 195.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0014">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0014">(9)</a>Kock, pp. 6-9.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0015">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0015">(10)</a><span class="underline">DSOB</span>, May 3, 1941, p. 530.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0016">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0016">(11)</a>Kock, p. 6.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0017">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0017">(12)</a><span class="underline">DSOB</span>, Oct. 10, 1942, p. 821.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0018">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0018">(13)</a><span class="underline">DSOB</span>, May 24, 1941, p. 620.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0019">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0019">(14)</a>J. Keith Horsefield, <span class="underline">The International
        Monetary Fund 1945-1965</span> (Washington: IMF, 1969), p. 27.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0020">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0020">(15)</a>Κ. W. Rothschild, "The Small Nation in World Trade,"
        Economic Journal 54 (Apr. 1944): 26-27.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0021">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0021">(16)</a>Charles S. Maier, "The Politics of Productivity:
        Foundations of American International Economic Policy After World War Two," <span class="underline">International Organization</span> 31 <a id="page_53"></a>(Autumn 1977): 609.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0022">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0022">(17)</a>Kock, pp. 32-33.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0023">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0023">(18)</a>Ibid., p. 10.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0024">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0024">(19)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 11.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0025">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0025">(20)</a>On the limited anticyclical role of the IMF delineated in 1946
        see William A. Brown, Jr., <span class="underline">The United States and the Restoration of World Trade</span>
        (Washington: Brookings, 1950), p. 83.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0026">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0026">(21)</a>Rothschild, p. 31.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0027">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0027">(22)</a>Brown, pp. 72-74; Wilcox, pp. 30-41.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0028">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0028">(23)</a>Kock, p. 67.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0029">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0029">(24)</a>Quoted in Horsefield, p. 123.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0030">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0030">(25)</a>Horse field, pp. 95-96. Given the continuing consequences of
        the war's devastation and the lack of comparable statistics, the formula for deciding IMF quotas and votes
        involved many noneconomic considerations. It is thus more of an index of "effective power" than any
        simple economic ranking would be.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0031">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0031">(26)</a>Requiring reciprocal concessions based on the principle
        supplier rule gives bargaining advantages to nations with relatively more commodities to trade (a wider range
        of possible products from which to choose a concession) and disadvantages those nations that compete with many
        other nations in selling the same product because none is a "principal supplier" and thus able to
        claim reciprocal concessions from trading partners. See Kock, p. 63. GATT voting rules follow the one nation
        one vote principle agreed upon for the ITO in 1948, over the objections of the U.S., which wanted explicitly
        weighted voting. See Brown, pp. 145-46. Given the GATT's primary role as a tariff negotiation framework,
        the political principles embodied in its rules for negotiation are more important than those embodied in the
        contracting parties voting rights. The contracting parties cannot change the GATT rules by a majority vote
        because the tariff negotiating rules constitute the contract.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0032">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0032">(27)</a><span class="underline">Economist</span>, Aug. 18, 1945, p.
        221.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0033">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0033">(28)</a>Quoted in Kock, p. 4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0034">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0034">(29)</a><span class="underline">Economist</span>, Oct. 26, 1945, p.
        652; Sept. 17, 1947, pp. 505-506; Nov. 22, 1947, p. 828.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0035">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0035">(30)</a><span class="underline">Economist</span>, July 17, 1948, p.
        90.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0036">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0036">(31)</a><span class="underline">Economist</span>, Feb. 21, 1948, p.
        308; Kock, p. 48.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0037">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0037">(32)</a>Brown, p. 98.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0038">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0038">(33)</a>World Bank, <span class="underline">Annual Report</span>
        (Washington: 1947), pp. 13-17.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0039">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0039">(34)</a>See Harry Price, <span class="underline">The Marshall Plan and
        Its Meaning</span>. (Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1955), p. 23 on Europeans choosing specific Marshall Plan
        goals; Brown, p. 136 on Latin American nations waiting for American aid pledges; and the <span class="underline">Economist</span>, May 8, 1948, p. 782 for Marshall's speech.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0040">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0040">(35)</a>Kock, pp. 41-52.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0041">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0041">(36)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>
</div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0042">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0042">(37)</a>The best discussion of the demise of the ITO <a id="page_54"></a>remains that in Richard N. Gardner's <span class="underline">Sterl</span>ing-Dollar
        <span class="underline">Diplomacy</span>, expanded edition, (New York: ColumbTä~~ÜHIv. Press, 1980), pp.
        348-80.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0043">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0043">(38)</a>Alfred George Moss and Harry Winton, A_New <span class="underline">Internati</span>o<span class="underline">nal Economic</span> Or<span class="underline">der</span>:
        <span class="underline">Selected Documents, 1945-1975</span> ~?New York: UNITARY, p. 1. Hereafter references to
        this source will give the name and date of the actual document and its page number in the collection.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0044">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0044">(39)</a>Selected Documents, Charter of the United Nations, June 26,
        1945, p. 1.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0045">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0045">(40)</a>UNRRA asked that all donor nations give two allotments of
        funds each equal to 1 percent of their national income in 1943. The figures below are from UNRRA, <span class="underline">Report of the Director General to the Council</span> (Washington: 1947), p. 55.
      </div>
<div class="table">
<table class="item3" width="100%">
<thead class="middle">
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left"><span class="underline">Country</span></td>
<td class="left"><span class="underline">Contributions</span></td>
<td class="left"><span class="underline">As % of 1943 Income</span></td>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody class="middle1">
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">Total</td>
<td class="left">$ 3,624,945,884</td>
<td class="left"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">Canada</td>
<td class="left">138,738,739</td>
<td class="left">2.00</td>
</tr>
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">U.S.A.</td>
<td class="left">2,700,000,000</td>
<td class="left">2.00</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">Australia</td>
<td class="left">76,800,000</td>
<td class="left">1.97</td>
</tr>
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">United Kingdom</td>
<td class="left">624,650,000</td>
<td class="left">1.97</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">New Zealand</td>
<td class="left">16,640,000</td>
<td class="left">1.96</td>
</tr>
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">Brazil</td>
<td class="left">40,000,000</td>
<td class="left">1.72</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">Iceland</td>
<td class="left">1,435,208</td>
<td class="left">1.71</td>
</tr>
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">Dominican Rep.</td>
<td class="left">858,750</td>
<td class="left">1.23</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">Panama</td>
<td class="left">424,100</td>
<td class="left">1.06</td>
</tr>
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">South Africa</td>
<td class="left">18,112,500</td>
<td class="left">1.00</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">Chile</td>
<td class="left">3,074,516</td>
<td class="left">.47</td>
</tr>
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">Nicaragua</td>
<td class="left">120,750</td>
<td class="left">.35</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">Costa Rica</td>
<td class="left">115,511</td>
<td class="left">.29</td>
</tr>
<tr class="item4">
<td class="left">Mexico</td>
<td class="left">3,938,223</td>
<td class="left">. 28</td>
</tr>
<tr class="calibre3">
<td class="left">Paraguay</td>
<td class="left">37,587</td>
<td class="left">. 20</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0046">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0046">(41)</a>United Nations, <span class="underline">Summary Record of the
        Meetings of the Second Committee of the General Assembly First Session, Second Part</span> (Lake Success, NY:
        19467, p. 51. Hereafter references to reports of Second Committee will include the session and subsession
        number, date of the <span class="underline">actual</span> debate, and page number in the English summary.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0047">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0047">(42)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 1.2, Nov. 11, 1946, p.
        51, and Dec. 12, p. 139.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0048">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0048">(43)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 1.2, Nov. 11, 1946, p.
        51.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0049">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0049">(44)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., p. 50, and see
        <span class="underline">New York Times</span>, Oct. 1, 1946, p. 10.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0050">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0050">(45)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 1.2, Dec. 6, 1946, pp.
        136-37.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0051">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0051">(46)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 1.2, Dec. 5, 1946, p.
        127.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0052">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0052">(47)</a>UNICEF, more than any other U.N. agency, follows the aid model
        La Guardia advocated.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0053">
<a id="page_55"></a><a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0053">(4 )</a><span class="underline">Second</span>,
        1.2, Nov. 20, 1946, p. 89. Earlier, Second, 1.1, Jan. 25, 1946, p. 12, Brazil claimed that its government had
        given 10 percent of its national income to UNRRA, a claim not challenged in the debate. See Cordell Hull,
        <span class="underline">Memoirs</span> (New York: Macmillan, 1948), p. 1678 for his view of Brazil at the time.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0054">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0054">(49)</a>See note 40 above.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0055">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0055">(50)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 2, Oct. 10, 1947, p.
        46, and see the discussion in Fitch and Oppenheimer, p. 42.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0056">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0056">(51)</a>John G. Hadwen and Johan Kaufman, <span class="underline">How
        United Nations Decisions are Made</span>, (Lyden: A. W. Sythoff, 1960), pp. 85-86.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0057">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0057">(52)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 4, Oct. 1, 1949, p. 9.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0058">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0058">(53)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 3, Nov. 2, 1948, pp.
        168-69.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0059">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0059">(54)</a>Brazi1, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 1.2, Nov. 20,
        1946, p. 89; Argentina, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 1.1, Jan. 22, 1946, p. 8.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0060">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0060">(55)</a>Hadwen and Kaufman, pp. 95-100.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0061">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0061">(56)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 110.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0062">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0062">(57)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 4, Oct. 3, 1949, p. 17.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0063">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0063">(58)</a>United Nations Economic and Social Council, Commission on
        Human Rights, <span class="underline">Official Records</span>, May 2, 1952.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0064">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0064">(59)</a>Latin American states based their position on nineteenth
        century legal theorist Charles Calvo's doctrine that public property reflects the state and that the state
        has a right to make any private property, including that of foreigners, public in any way that best reflects
        the state. Prudence, Calvo says, dictates that foreign proprietors be paid for their property. See Edward M.
        Gallaudet's <span class="underline">A Manual for International Law</span> (New York: A. S. Barnes, 1879),
        an English language text based on Calvo's more extensive work. Especially compare pp. 79-80 to the Human
        Rights Commission position.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0065">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0065">(60}</a>Ada Bozeman, <span class="underline">The Future of Law in a
        Multicultural World</span> (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1971), pp. 6-7.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0066">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0066">(61)</a>Michael Brecher, <span class="underline">India and World,
        Politics: Krishna Menon's View of the World</span> (New York: Praeger, 1968), p. 143.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0067">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0067">(62)</a>A brief comparison of the sections on general principles in
        the <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span> should suffice to prove this point. The <span class="underline">Panch</span> <span class="underline">Shi1a</span> appear in the Afro-Asian Conference Communique,
        April 24, 1955, p. 2, the Belgrade Declaration of the Non-Aligned Countries, Sept. 6, 1961, p. 9, and UNCTAD I:
        Final Act and Recommendations, June 15, 1964, p. 47-50, to mention a few significant places.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0068">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0068">(63)</a>Russell H. Fifield, <span class="underline">The Diplomacy of
        South East Asia: 1945-1958</span> (New York: Harper, 1958), pp. 108-10.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0069">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0069">(64)</a>See La Guardia's acceptance speech. <span class="underline">New York Times</span>, March 30, 1946, p. 5.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0070">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0070">(65)</a>On Indonesia see Clifford Geertz, "Ideology as a Cultural
        System," in David E. Apter, ed., <span class="underline">Ideology and Discontent</span> (New York: Free
        Press, 1964), pp. 69-71.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0071">
<a id="page_56"></a><a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0071">(66)</a>Robert A. Packenham, <span class="underline">Liberal America and the Third World</span> (Princeton: Princeton UniVl Press, 1973).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0072">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0072">(67)</a>Garry Wills, <span class="underline">Nixon Agonistes</span>
        (New York: New American Library, 1979), pp. 430-39. Two earlier uses of the term "universalism" are
        also interesting. In <span class="underline">Sterling-Dollar Diplomacy</span>, Gardner criticizes the Bretton
        Woods system for being "universalist" and means by that that the system payed too little attention to
        regional economic differences and that its framers did not consider the possibility of using regional
        organization more than the global, "universal" organization. Essentially, he uses the term to frame
        some Keynesian doubts about the system, suggesting it might not be equally good for everyone. See pp. 381-85
        and his later partial revision, pp. xxi-xxii. Hans Horgenthau also talked about "universalism," the
        "universalism" of twentieth century nationalism. In this century, unlike in the last, nationalism has
        come to both encompass all other bonds of society and each nation has come to think of its own way of doing
        things as universally valid; in <span class="underline">Politics Among Nations</span> (New York: Alfred A.
        Knopf, 1948), pp. 267-69.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0073">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0073">(68)</a>Kock, p. 7, quoting an article written in 1941 by American
        free trade advocate, Percy Bidwell.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0074">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0074">(69)</a>World Bank, <span class="underline">Annual Report</span>
        (Washington: 1953), p. 9. See also the articles 15 Bert Hoselitz, <span class="underline">The Progress of the
        Underdeveloped Countries</span> (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1952), especially Jacob Viner's
        "American Aims and the Progress of the Underdeveloped Countries," pp. 175-202.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0075">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0075">(70)</a>Nyerere on the Ivory Coast in Juluis K. Nyerere, <span class="underline">Freedom and Development</span> (London: Oxford Univ. Press), pp. 12-14; on the political system
        within Zanzibar, p. 276.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0076">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0076">(71)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 1.2, Nov. 14, 1946, p.
        73; Nov. 20, 1946, p. 89.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0077">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0077">(72)</a>Wilcox, p. 30.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0078">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0078">(73)</a>League of Nations, <span class="underline">Industrialization
        and World Trade</span> (Geneva: 1945), pp. 30 ff., 70.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0079">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0079">(74)</a>Kurt Mandelbaum, <span class="underline">The Industrialisation
        of Backward Areas</span> (Oxford: Institute of Statistics Monograph #2, 1945), pp. 1-4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0080">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0080">(75)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 3, Oct. 6, 1948, pp.
        13-15.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0081">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0081">(76)</a>Colombia, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 3, Oct. 13,
        1948, p. 60; United States, Oct. 29, 1948, p. 139.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0082">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0082">(77)</a>Raul Prebisch, <span class="underline">The Economic
        Development of Latin America and Its Principal Problems"</span> (Lake Success: United Nations, 1950).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0083">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0083">(78)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 5, Nov. 11, 1950, p.
        138.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0084">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0084">(79)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 6, Nov. 20, 1951, p.
        19.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0085">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0085">(80)</a>World Bank, <span class="underline">Annual Report</span>
        (Washington: 1951), p. 19.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0086">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0086">(81)</a>In particular, Asian governments called the Bandung conference
        to respond to the failing British Colombo Plan, see Brecher, p. 52. Britain sharply limited <a id="page_57"></a>funds for the plan in 1954 in order to send the bulk of funds to Malaysia where communist
        insurgents operated. The U.S. indicated it was willing to increase aid to Asia but wanted a specifically
        anti-communist pact to administer such aid. At first; most Asian nations opposed such a pact as a threat to
        sovereignty; see the <span class="underline">Economist</span>, Sept. 25, 1954, p. 957. Nonetheless, despite the
        aid issues that triggered the first Afro-Asian meeting, Menon says that the later idea of a nonaligned movement
        was not a response to economic development problems. See Brecher, p. 4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0087">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0087">(82)</a>Ignancy Sachs, <span class="underline">The Discovery of the
        Third World</span> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1976), p. xi.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0088">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0088">(83)</a> Maurice Dobb, <span class="underline">Some Aspects of
        Economic Development</span> (New Dehli: School of Economics, 1951), and see Gunnar Myrdal's comment on the
        Indian planning ideology in <span class="underline">An Asian Drama</span>, vol. 2, (New York: Twentieth Century
        Fund, 1971), Chap. 15.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0089">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0089">(84)</a>Fernando H. Cardoso, "The Originality of a Copy: CEPAL
        and the Idea of Development," <span class="underline">CEPAL Review</span> 22 (Second half of 1977): 24-29.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0090">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0090">(85)</a>W. Arthur Lewis, <span class="underline">Aspects of
        Industrialization</span> (Cairo: National Bank of Egypt, 1953), pp. 6-17.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0091">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0091">(86)</a>Gunnar Myrdal, <span class="underline">Development and
        Underdevelopment</span> (Cairo: National Bank of Egypt, 1956).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0092">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0092">(87)</a>W. W. RostoWf <span class="underline">The Procesa of Economic
        Growth</span> (London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1960, first ed. 1953), pp. 10-12.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0093">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0093">(88)</a>John H. Adler, "Development Theory and the Bank's
        Development Strategy," <span class="underline">Finance and Development</span> 14 (Oct. 1977); 32.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0094">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0094">(89)</a>World Bank, <span class="underline">Annual Report</span>
        (Washington: 1960), pp. 5-6. The early report on debt servicing is Dragoslav Arramovic and Ravi Gulhati,
        <span class="underline">Debt Servicing Problems of Low Income Countries: 1956-1958</span> (Baltimore: Johns
        Hopkins Univ. Press, 1960).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0095">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0095">(90)</a>Brian Tew, <span class="underline">The Evolution of the
        International Monetary System</span> (New York: John Wiley, 1977), pp. 48-55.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0096">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0096">(91)</a>Kock, pp. 117-18.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0097">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0097">(92)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, pp. 168-69.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0098">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0098">(93)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, pp. 100-101
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0099">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0099">(94)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 174.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0100">
<a href="Ch02.xhtml#bck_fn0100">(95)</a><span class="underline">Economist</span>, Nov. 21, 1959, p.
        63. Rostow's <span class="underline">Stages of Growth</span> appeared in Aug. 1959.
      </div>
</div>

<br class="end-page"/></div>