<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Emergence Of The Nieo Ideology</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <h1 id="ht0022" class="h1_title"><a id="page_91"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0022">3
    <br class="calibre1"/>
    1970–1974: Cracks in the Old Order and Calls for the New</a></h1>

    <div class="quotes">
      <div class="text_noindent">
        If listeners to the lengthy speeches and readers of the flow of documents acquired a slight sensation of having
        heard much of the debate before, a rapid perusal of earlier documents will show their suspicions to be
        justified. "What I tell you three times is true," is, of course, very largely the case in relation to
        the developing world's problems.
      </div>

      <div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Barbara Ward, 1974
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="quotes">
      <div class="text_noindent">
        The Present Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order shall be one of the most
        important bases for relations between all peoples and nations.
      </div>

      <div class="attrib-text_right">
        — The General Assembly, 1974(<a id="bck_fn0183" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0183">1</a>)
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      If anything, Barbara Ward's sympathy for the third world makes her overestimate the originality of the 1974
      New International Economic Order texts. Only the notion that the third world policy analysis was sophisticated
      enough to actually govern global economic relations was new. The 1974 documents repeated old views, yet they were
      more consistent and comprehensive than any previous set of new order texts. In 1974 the newly named
      "NIEO" ideology provided a more coherent basis for an alternative to Bretton Woods than it ever had
      before.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Nonetheless, in retrospect the language of the 1974 texts has even more of an Alice in Wonderland quality than
      Barbara Ward detected. But when they wrote the 1974 texts, new order advocates shared a new hope that the old
      order was falling. They believed that restating their views could be something more than ritual. Third world
      officials knew as well as Barbara Ward did that no genie with magic words, or even the wiliest sympathizers with
      the U.N., would be able to convince all governments of the truth of the third world position. But changes in
      <a id="page_92"></a>American economic policy beginning in 1971 appeared to signal the end of the postwar economic
      system. The system's operation had begun to have unanticipated consequences unacceptable to its major
      supporters. By 1974 all national governments recognized a need to change the international economic order. The
      LDCs thought they had a chance to influence the change that was bound to take place.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      To be able to present the coherent new order proposals they presented, third world governments had to engage in
      unprecedented, complex international politics between 1970 and 1974. Four types of third world actions influenced
      the coherence and content of the ΝΙΕO ideology by the time the proposals it framed had become major issues on the
      international agenda.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      First, in uniting to react to the increased trade restrictions imposed by the U.S. and the decreased value of all
      aid as a result of American actions taken in 1971 third world officials reaffirmed that the unity of their
      alliance was fundamental and that it was based on common grievances with the present global economic order. They
      reaffirmed that the present order operated to the equal detriment of all third world states.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Second, to help cement the renewed unity that these new grievances established, third world leaders — both
      government officials and scholars — began to adopt the intellectual framework provided by the dependency and
      neocolonialism theories that had been worked out by independent third world thinkers since the mid-1960s. That
      framework provided a more coherent way to understand the most recent problems experienced by third world
      countries, the problems associated with TNCs and existing impediments to the transfer of technology. The
      framework served to minimize new research on economic differences among third world regions, differences which
      had caused the cracks in the LDC alliance in the late sixties. And analyses of dependency and neocolonialism
      convinced some of the leaders of older third world states in Latin America and Asia to accept that developed
      states had historical duties to LDCs; thus the dependency framework contributed to a resolution of the conflict
      over ethics between richer and poorer third world states.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The dependency framework also justified a greater sense of grievance with developed nations because it suggested
      that LDCs had suffered from ideological as well as political domination. The sense of grievance helped legitimate
      more aggressive actions to improve the economic position of the south — including the OPEC price increases —
      while it called into question the ability of developed states to negotiate major changes in the economic order
      without prodding. Third world political action more militant than the employment of "democratic means"
      thus became more acceptable to the alliance as a whole. In addition, the dependency <a id="page_93"></a>framework
      suggested that fundamental change in the international system could remove dependence. Third world leaders had to
      argue for revolutionary change.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      While doing so they resolved the roles of their, still contradictory views of the responsibility of developed
      nations. The restitution ethic became the basis for the north's moral duty to negotiate a new order. The
      notion of permanent states rights and duties to aid the unique economic development of every other state remained
      the single ethic that would guide action in the world economic system that would then be created.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      A third aspect of the inter-LDC politics that created the 1974 new order demands is leadership. Leadership of the
      alliance as a whole was much more evident and important in the early 1970s than it had been ever before. Leaders
      tended to select themselves rather than be selected; nonetheless, in the early seventies some national
      governments and individuals organized the entire alliance to anticipate and employ the newly experienced economic
      vulnerabilities of the postwar system's supporters.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Finally, third world governments united to anticipate and react to the new economic policies that developed
      states suggested in international meetings as proposed solutions to the system's crises. Some policies
      advocated by the north, creating international means for dealing with environmental degradation and controlling
      population, were responses to the unanticipated "resource limits to growth" revealed by the vast
      expansion of the world economy since the war. Similarly, northern proposals for controlling the international
      energy trade were indirectly responses to limits to growth problems, although much more directly to the
      unanticipated development of a powerful bloc of third world oil producers. The responses of third world leaders
      to these problems had consequences for their NIEO ideology. Southern ideologists argued the oil price increases
      were legitimate but changed their views on some other issues in response to the north's concerns.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      This chapter begins with a review of the divisions within the southern alliance in 1970. Then it discusses the
      causes of each of the four types of political action outlined above, their consequences for the new order
      ideology, and the sources of new elements added to the ideology as the result of each type of action.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0023" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0023">The Third World Divided</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In 1970 observers could see two camps in the third world. Each had a different approach to international and
      domestic economic problems. Those differences can be exemplified by contrasts between the resolutions of the
      nonaligned states, which met that year in Lusaka, and the <a id="page_94"></a>resolutions on the Second
      Development Decade that the General Assembly adopted a few months later.(<a id="bck_fn0184" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0184">2</a>) The first program was much more radical than the second.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Both theoretical and tactical differences separated the two blocs within the third world. The nonaligned states,
      predominantly nations that had obtained their independence since the second world war, predominantly from Africa,
      and predominantly very poor, emphasized colonialism and neocolonialism as the forces impeding global economic
      change. The General Assembly where the Latin American states played a major role (and, of course, where the
      developed states had a voice) concentrated on more specific barriers to economic change, things that had long
      been identified by supporters of the new order ideology — low levels of international aid and trade restrictions
      imposed on third world products, for example. The General Assembly did not mention neocolonialism. It limited its
      political discussion to reiteration of specific economic duties of states and closed by calling on national
      governments, particularly in developed states, to influence public opinion and convince the wealthy of their
      duties. The nonaligned states, in contrast, spoke of "democratic means" only in terms of
      "democratization of international relations," that is, "the right of all countries to participate
      in international relations on an equal footing."(<a id="bck_fn0185" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0185">3</a>)
      In addition, the nonaligned states emphasized economic duties of developing states toward one another by focusing
      on a newly named strategy, "collective self-reliance."(<a id="bck_fn0186" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0186">4</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In 1970 collective self-reliance was still more of a symbol than a program. It referred to no one policy. Aid to
      the least developed states, autarky, and receiving aid from China were all included under this rubric.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The notion of collective self-reliance grew out of the frustrations felt by the poorest developing nations with
      their unsuccessful attempts in the sixties to find solutions to their economic problems through changes in the
      global system. The states most concerned with collective self-reliance were the ones that first raised the issue
      of aid to the least developed in the 1960s. The principle had been affirmed by the U.N. but in 1970 it still had
      no influence on the policies of aid agencies, including the U.N. programs.(<a id="bck_fn0187" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0187">5</a>) In response to international aid that they felt was meager relative to their needs,
      some LLDC governments began to consider their own national resources to be the only sure basis upon which they
      could make development plans. "Self-reliance" symbolized that recognition without pointing to any
      particular policy. " Collective self-reliance" of third world states suggested that inter-third world
      aid and cooperation was essential. The nonaligned states committed themselves to that aid without specifying
      programs except to reiterate that all <a id="page_95"></a>third world states should unite behind efforts to aid
      the least developed.(<a id="bck_fn0188" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0188">6</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The General Assembly as a whole, in contrast, included all of the relatively wealthy third world states. By 1970
      some of those states, especially in Latin America, had already become a sort of global "middle class,"
      a semiperiphery capable of making some economic advances within the postwar system. They did not suffer the
      specific frustrations the LLDCs knew. To most Latin American states the idea of opting out of the present system,
      which seemed to be what "self-reliance" meant, was absurd.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Of course, opting out of the international system was just as absurd to most nonaligned members. They had no such
      choice. Their international affirmation of self-reliance reflected little desire to leave the system. Instead, it
      reflected their growing realization that most developed states were not going to expand their aid commitments no
      matter how poorer states tried to convince northern elites of the moral duties incumbent upon the wealthy or upon
      former colonizers. The nonaligned adopted the view presented by the Sudanese in the U.N. two years earlier:
      Developed states gave aid for their own reasons. The poorest states were forced to be self reliant, or, at least,
      reliant upon the collective help that developing states could offer one another.(<a id="bck_fn0189" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0189">7</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In affirming collective self-reliance the more radical nonaligned states moved away from the position that the
      duties of former colonizers to aid former colonies could be an effective ethic in the international economy. The
      duties of third world states under "collective self-reliance" reflected the duties the nonaligned had
      said every state had at Bandung and earlier. The nonaligned states thus proved a 1970s version of the Indo-Sino
      <span class="underline">Paneh</span> <span class="underline">Shila</span>. In fact, the resolutions of the Lusaka
      conference linked this duty of collective self-reliance to the dictates of the U.N. Charter, interpreted as it
      had been by the third world since 1946.(<a id="bck_fn0190" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0190">8</a>) In this sense
      "collective self-reliance" represented a step toward unifying the positions on ethics taken by
      different third world states in the sixties. The poorest third world states moved back toward the long-standing
      new order position.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Yet "collective self-reliance" did little to resolve the ideological differences among third world
      nations, at first. The roots of the notion, the models of collective self-reliance praised both by third world
      officials and by scholars in 1970, hardly appealed to nonsocialist third world states or to those with
      outward-oriented economic policies. The nonaligned states took China and Yugoslavia to be examples of nations
      that had achieved self-reliant development.(<a id="bck_fn0191" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0191">9</a>)
      "Self-reliance" had been given a stronger ideological form in the democratic socialist program of
      Tanzania, the Arusha Declaration, <a id="page_96"></a>which proposed a Spartan sort of development centered
      around self-reliant village collectives.(<a id="bck_fn0192" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0192">10</a>) The single
      most cited example of international, collective self-reliance in 1970 was the railroad connecting Zambia and
      Tanzania. It was built not with the expensive technical assistance and vast capital outlays of a northern
      bilateral aid program or of a U.N. project, but with the aid of Chinese work teams living in Africa in a style
      little better than that of their African hosts.(<a id="bck_fn0193" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0193">11</a>) From
      the point of view of a development planner in (say) Brazil or Iran in 1970, collective self-reliance looked like
      an inward turning, autarkic program compatible, at best, with the minimal requirements of a barely developing
      national economy. Indeed when Tanzania's Julius Nyerere stated his nation's development ideology he
      emphasized that his country could not become a mass-consumption industrial society in the forseeable future,, a
      view that the leaders of wealthier third world states rarely offered in an analysis of their own
      countries.(<a id="bck_fn0194" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0194">12</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In 1970 the fundamental differences in economic interests perceived by the more- and less-wealthy third world
      states remained. The notion of collective self-reliance would only come to help bridge the ideological rift when
      wealthier third world states started to push for aid to the least developed.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0024" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0024">The Third World Reunited</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      During the 1971 autumn session of the General Assembly the wealthier southern states did push for a more direct
      identification of the LLDCs. The General Assembly ordered all U.N. agencies to come up with special plans for
      aiding those states, plans that were to be "comprehensive" and "action oriented."(<a id="bck_fn0195" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0195">13</a>) This turned out to be just one example of the increasing
      third world unity during that session.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The long-term dynamics of the global economic system established at the end of the second world war assured that
      third world governments would have reason to reconstruct their unity. The system generated problems that made the
      U.S. government adopt a new economic policy in August of 1971. The problems that southern nations believed the
      policy would create for them generated the south's renewed unity.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Ostensively, the American decisions had nothing to do with third world issues. American policy makers were trying
      to improve the position of their economy relative to economies of other developed market states. The most
      dramatic, if not the most substantive, part of the new U.S. policy involved severing the last link between the
      value of the dollar and gold. That was enough to make even the popular press see a transformation of the <a id="page_97"></a>international economic system.(<a id="bck_fn0196" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0196">14</a>)
      Nevertheless, the new policy was not designed to usher in a new international economic order. In fact, it was
      enacted when it was in order to save the economic system from greater crisis.(<a id="bck_fn0197" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0197">15</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The immediate problem the Americans faced in 1971 was a massive trade deficit, primarily to western Europe. The
      trade deficit added to the long-standing payments deficit the U.S. had with its developed partners. Earlier,
      American imports from developed countries and American export of capital to them had facilitated economic growth
      in Europe and Japan. Likewise, American payments deficits were, in a sense, integral to the system because they
      assured that the international currency, dollars, was available in the volume needed for trade. Dollars could be
      used to be used to buy goods from any state. Foreign holders of dollars could safely refuse to spend them
      immediately on goods that could be purchased only in the U.S. because currencies remained convertible. In fact,
      if need be, foreign holders of dollars could convert them into gold through the U.S. government.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the very beginning of the Bretton Woods system's regular operation, in the late fifties, the
      convertibility of dollars into gold was an especially important part of what made the system work. It meant that
      the dollar, and each of the currencies that could be converted into the dollar, was backed by a relatively stable
      measure of value. Merchants from all countries could feel secure while engaging in international trade because
      the money they had a money they could trust. Trade expanded and triggered economic growth that benefited many
      nations. Not the least of the benefits went to the U.S., whose trade expanded to provide the capital equipment
      needed for the economic recovery of the formerly-developed states.(<a id="bck_fn0198" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0198">16</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      After the Japanese and western European economies reached the same mass production levels as the U.S. economy,
      the benefits of this system to the U.S. started to diminish. Western European and Japanese interest in purchasing
      American goods failed to grow as quickly as before. Foreign markets for American goods could have expanded had
      the U.S.'s major trading partners revalued their currencies upward against the dollar, making American goods
      relatively cheaper. Markets also could have expanded had the U.S. devalued the dollar. But the Bretton Woods
      institutions provided no easy means for forcing the relevant governments to adopt either of these policies. The
      IMF could recommend that (say) the Germans or the Japanese revalue their currencies, but the IMF had no power to
      enforce the recommendation. Nations with strong currencies hardly needed the balance of payments loans the IMF
      provided. The IMF was equally powerless relative to the U.S. It could not force the U.S. to <a id="page_98"></a>devalue the dollar the same way it could "force" any other debtor state, by offering
      loans with devaluation as part of the quid pro quo. The "values" of various currencies the IMF actually
      could attempt to devalue were stated, in large part, in U.S. dollars. The Bretton Woods system itself had to
      change if there were to be a U.S. devaluation because the American currency was not merely a national currency
      with a value that could be freely changed against an international standard; it was the international standard,
      as much as the gold it was convertible into. The American Treasury's valuation of dollars relative to other
      currencies thus served two functions. It not only defined the value of the currency that could be used to buy
      American goods, it provided the international standard of value for all currencies.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      By 1971 the American government had come to see these two goals as contradictory. Domestic economic interest, in
      reducing the trade deficit, demanded that the U.S. devalue the dollar. International economic stability seemed to
      depend on the U.S. accepting an overvalued dollar. This contradiction assured that some aspect of the postwar
      system would change. The Nixon administration did not decide to scrap the Bretton Woods system in 1971; that
      would have been the much greater crisis that the government wanted to avoid. Nonetheless, the administration
      attempted, successfully, to force other DMCs to renegotiate some of the fundamental principles of Bretton Woods.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The unilateral U.S. action was designed to do one of the things the IMF could not do to ease the U.S. trade
      deficit. The U.S. decisions were not aimed at removing the dollar as an international standard of value, which
      would have been one way to approach the problem. Rather, the U.S. aim was to force new exchange rates between the
      dollar and the currencies of America's major trading partners, to make U.S. goods less expensive
      abroad.(<a id="bck_fn0199" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0199">17</a>) Removing the convertibility of the dollar to
      gold forced those holding dollars abroad to seek another way of being sure their dollars continued to hold value.
      The easiest way was to let the value of the U.S. dollar relative to other convertible currencies be more freely
      determined by international money markets and by new financial agreements among the DMCs. Because there was an
      impetus to value the dollar accurately relative to other currencies, the dollar was effectively devalued.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In order to encourage the adjustments in the trade and money policies of other DMCs that the effective
      devaluation of the dollar would require, the United States took some actions that, inadvertently, affected the
      LDCs as well. In addition to suspending dollar-gold convertibility, the U.S. government announced across the
      board tariff increases of 10 percent on goods coming into the U.S.(<a id="bck_fn0200" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0200">18</a>) Third world products became more expensive to Americans; third world income from
      trade was bound to <a id="page_99"></a>fall.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      And the effective devaluation of the dollar, itself, hurt third world economies. Dollars that the LDCs received
      from the multilateral aid agencies and the IMF were devalued so that, in real terms, aid decreased rapidly. By
      mid-1972, dollars purchased significantly less in all DMCs other than the U.S. than they had a year
      before.(<a id="bck_fn0201" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0201">19</a>) It took significantly more of the dollars
      from a World Bank loan for Senegalese fishermen to buy Norwegian tackle. It took significantly more of the
      dollars from an IMF drawing for the Ivorian government to settle a debt in Marks to the West Germans. Of course,
      no increase in U.S. aid alleviated this problem of the decreased value of multilateral aid denominated in
      dollars. The point of the overall U.S. program was to make foreigners more interested in buying goods produced in
      the U.S. where the dollar in 1972 could still purchase most of what it could in 1971. In fact, rather than
      increasing U.S. aid in 1972, the government decreased it even in the "real" terms of its purchasing
      power in the U.S. alone.(<a id="bck_fn0202" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0202">20</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The third world reaction to the new American economic policy was swift and negative. In 1970 third world
      delegates had dispensed with the general debate on economic matters at the fall U.N. session because the debates
      were so repetitive. Positions were known. There was nothing new to say. (<a id="bck_fn0203" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0203">21</a>) But the third world vigorously reentered the debate in September 1971.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      During the fall 1971 General Assembly session southern delegates never contradicted each other's analysis of
      the economic decisions the American government had made in August. The third world argument can be separated into
      four parts, discussions of (1) the reasons for the American decision, (2) the role of the third world in
      alleviating American economic problems, (3) the regrettable consequences of the U.S. action that the south would
      have to suffer, and (4) the actions that should be taken in light of the American decisions.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world delegates argued that the ultimate reasons for the American decisions could be found in flaws in the
      Bretton Woods system, flaws that existed only because southern interests were not consulted when the system was
      created.(<a id="bck_fn0204" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0204">22</a>) This view justified increasing third world
      input into the decisions to restructure the IMF that would have to be made in wake of the American decisions. But
      the historical assertion was never backed by analysis of how the Bretton Woods system could have been any less
      flawed with third world input.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The Libyan and Iraqi delegates identified the more immediate cause of the American actions as the American
      payments deficit. The deficit had grown throughout the Indo-China War, they argued. It was caused by the war and
      by the vast cost of the U.S. military bases in Europe.(<a id="bck_fn0205" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0205">23</a>) The Libyans concluded that southern states <a id="page_100"></a>were not responsible
      for the economic problems of a developed nation when those problems were caused by such "foreign
      adventurism."(<a id="bck_fn0206" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0206">24</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Complementing this analysis of the reasons for the American decisions, the Peruvians noted that southern states
      had, in fact, contributed to the American economy. Most third world states had trade deficits to the United
      States similar to the deficits the U.S. had to its developed trading partners. In addition, the south contributed
      through profits repatriated to American TNCs operating in third world countries, profits that, he argued,
      exceeded the new U.S. investment in the south.(<a id="bck_fn0207" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0207">25</a>) Egypt
      and Mexico reiterated this point about TNC profits flowing into the U.S.(<a id="bck_fn0208" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0208">26</a>) The Mexican delegate went so far as to illustrate that the U.S. was profiting from
      its developed trading partners in Europe in the same way. These three delegations described the United States as
      governed by people who would irrationally and unfairly make nations that had contributed to American economic
      vigor suffer for American economic setbacks, setbacks that had been caused by the "adventurism"
      discussed by Libya and Iraq.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world delegates saved their most vehement denunciation of the U.S. for predictions about the consequences
      of U.S. action. In light of the reduction of real American aid to the third world, the Philippine delegate
      predicted the immediate failure of the U.N.'s Second Development Decade.(<a id="bck_fn0209" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0209">27</a>) Most LDC spokesmen noted that American tariff surcharges would reduce the south's
      income from trade. The Nigerian delegate charged that as a result, African states would join Latin American
      states and some of the large nations of Asia as victims of high debt-servicing requirements, becoming debtors
      with loans they could never hope to pay unless development programs were reduced or halted.(<a id="bck_fn0210" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0210">28</a>) The Sudanese representative suggested another consequence of the
      American decision: Productivity was the key to development. Political instability assured lower productivity. And
      reductions in third world trade income assured political instability.(<a id="bck_fn0211" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0211">29</a>) In sum, the south held that the new American economic policy assured an abrupt
      slow-down in LDC development, and that was a global crisis.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      To alleviate the problems they expected to arise because of the American policy, most third world ambassadors
      just reiterated old formulas. For Upper Volta, one of the world's poorest states by any economic measure,
      direct financial assistance from the U.S. to compensate for the trade lost due to American tariff increases was a
      practical and moral necessity.(<a id="bck_fn0212" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0212">30</a>) The Mexican
      ambassador, in contrast, said that Mexico would not make claims for damages to the Mexican economy that would
      occur because of decisions already made. Rather, Mexico demanded creation of a global monetary system that would
      prevent nations from getting into the economic <a id="page_101"></a>straits that the U.S. had found itself in in
      the first place.(<a id="bck_fn0213" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0213">31</a>) While the Mexican delegate
      continued the tradition of the more conservative, older third world states and refused to argue for restitution
      the way African states did, he did so only in order to frame a more radical demand for restructuring the monetary
      order. Following the Mexican theme, the Egyptian delegate argued that, of course, the new monetary order would
      include the Link between international provisions of liquidity and foreign aid.(<a id="bck_fn0214" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0214">32</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In contrast to the long-standing third world programs offered by other states, Libya suggested a new departure.
      The Libyan government argued that it was time that the third world used its dormant capacity to influence raw
      material prices in order to change the world economy. This was a notion that the third world had long approved in
      theory, but that few governments practiced.(<a id="bck_fn0215" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0215">33</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Throughout 1970 and 1971 Libya had moved to nationalize all stages of domestic oil exploration and production.
      The government then used its power over traditional consumers of Libyan oil to raise its price. (<a id="bck_fn0216" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0216">34</a>) At the U.N. Libya merely suggested that its example be
      followed by other third world states. After all, DMCs seemed not to realize the continuing contribution of LDCs
      to DMC wealth. DMC governments failed to consider how the repatriated profits of TNCs helped the north. And the
      north failed to recognize the role played by the decline of DMC raw material prices relative to those of
      manufactured goods from the developed countries. According to Libya, southern states had every reason to follow
      its example, to nationalize those firms they had the power to nationalize and to raise the commodity prices they
      had the power to raise.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In sum, the American decisions provided an impetus for recreating third world unity and, ultimately, for
      reestablishing a unified third world ideology. For all practical purposes the unity of the Group of 77 was
      reestablished by the end of the General Assembly's 1971 session when the group made the assembly pass
      concrete proposals for providing U.N. aid to the LLDCs. But the ideological basis of that unity remained a bit
      tenuous.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      A rapid progression of international conferences on economic matters, called long before the American decisions,
      maintained the impetus toward greater unity and built momentum from late 1971 through 1974. In October 1971,
      while the U.N. debates about the global economy continued in New York, meetings of the Group of 77's regional
      subgroups covered the same topics in Addis Ababa, Bangkok, and Lima. At each conference delegates upbraided the
      U.S. for its decisions. In the African view the U.S. was trying to force the south to solve northern economic
      problems.(<a id="bck_fn0217" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0217">35</a>) At Lima the Latin American states agreed
      upon new extensions of the old notions of states' <a id="page_102"></a>economic rights and duties. Henceforth
      the economic rights of states included a state's right to demand removal of obstacles to its development when
      those obstacles were imposed by other states. The Lima conference considered American tariff surcharges examples
      of such obstacles. The Latin Americans extended the duties of states to include a specific duty of wealthy states
      to solve their payments problems without hurting the economies of poorer states.(<a id="bck_fn0218" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0218">36</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      When the Group of 77 met together in November, the Latin American position on new economic rights and duties
      became the view of the group as a whole. This added a new element to the shared ideology, the notion of a
      nation's "right to develop." In practical terms the LDCs used the "right to develop" as
      an overarching justification for all the conflicting positions about the wealthy nations' "duties to
      aid." The new right implied that states seeking a self-reliant development path had the right to expect that
      developed states would not oppose actions taken toward that end — nationalizations and restrictions on trade and
      investment.(<a id="bck_fn0219" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0219">37</a>) The south also used the right to develop
      to demand that developed states anticipate and facilitate the movement of some industries, including textile and
      clothing manufacturing, to the LDCs. This later policy was first proposed at the Asian states' meeting at
      Bangkok.(<a id="bck_fn0220" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0220">38</a>) Finally, this new principle, like the
      earlier versions of the third world ethic for international economic relations, implied a right of all nations to
      live under a world economic system that did not impede their specific national development plans. Thus, not
      surprisingly, although this notion had first been raised to frame grievances with the specific problems that the
      breakdown of the Bretton Woods system caused for Latin America, only a month after the idea was first raised the
      Group of 77 used it to justify fundamentally new policies, simply because those policies were integral to the
      development plans of a few nations that were part of the group.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Surprisingly, though, despite third world resentment of the new American economic policy and despite the Libyan
      precedent, the Group of 77 joint meeting placed little emphasis on exploiting DMC economic vulnerabilities in
      order to achieve LDC goals. The group's position on tactics remained the commitment to influence public and
      elite opinion in the DMCs.(<a id="bck_fn0221" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0221">39</a>) Nonetheless, by the end
      of 1971 many group members had made their dissatisfaction with this approach very clear. At the end of the three
      regional meetings only the Asians went on record supporting the tactic.(<a id="bck_fn0222" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0222">40</a>) During the U.N. debate in October only Uruguay made proposals along these lines,
      urging UNESCO to mobilize public opinion to support developing states.(<a id="bck_fn0223" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0223">41</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the third UNCTAD meeting in the spring of 1972 the group supported stronger affirmations of the right of
      <a id="page_103"></a>individual states to control natural resources.(<a id="bck_fn0224" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0224">42</a>) But the south did not stop trying to convince the elites and publics of developed
      states to accept responsibilities toward poorer states. Nonetheless, the one resolution passed on the subject did
      little more than praise the press briefing given by UNCTAD officials before the conference.(<a id="bck_fn0225" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0225">43</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In part the new, more militant tone of the group at UNCTAD III can be explained by the conference's location.
      Some observers from the DMCs have suggested that Santiago, the capital of Salvador Allende's newly elected
      Marxist government, attracted the most radical staff members from third world economic ministries, people
      interested in observing the experiment in social change going on in Chile.(<a id="bck_fn0226" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0226">44</a>) Since global economic meetings were so frequent in the early seventies, younger, more
      radical staffers could easily have won the right to go to Santiago. For that reason northern delegates took the
      debates in Santiago with a grain of salt. Yet, UNCTAD Ill's resolutions came to be a model for later third
      world positions rather than a more militant exception.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      No doubt Santiago, with its Marxist government, influenced the south's position at least indirectly.
      Throughout March and April of 1972 the world press reported stories of the earlier unsuccessful attempts of the
      American C.I.A. and the American transnational corporation I.T.T. to prevent Allende's election. Stories
      about continuing attempts to destabilize his regime appeared as well, implicating other corporations, other
      branches of the U.S. government, and even the World Bank.(<a id="bck_fn0227" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0227">45</a>) Had UNCTAD III been held at another time or on the other side of the globe, few third
      world officials would have had reason to reflect on the Chilean experience. In Santiago they did reflect on the
      power transnationals in cooperation with their home governments wielded over third world states. Perhaps the new
      third world emphasis on using their own power to control transnational firms and raw materials can be explained
      by that reflection.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      By the end of 1972 even the more conservative Latin American states were making more radical statements about the
      world economy than they ever had before. The catchphrase of that autumn's U.N. debate was "collective
      economic security." Uruguay called for "collective economic security" to be the fundamental
      principle of the new, post-Bretton Woods economic system that the United Nations should create.(<a id="bck_fn0228" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0228">46</a>) "Collective economic security" implied that
      third world states had to unite their powers to assure that their "right to develop" was respected. In
      that sense, "collective economic security" started as a Latin American version of "collective
      self-reliance." The 1972 General Assembly economic debate had only two major themes, "collective
      economic security" and the "new economic order" it implied.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      <a id="page_104"></a>Throughout the debate third world states praised themselves for working to achieve
      collective economic security. Peru noted that almost all members of the Group of 77 granted tariff preferences to
      the LLDCs. The Peruvian delegate praised the formation of the Andean Pact for the same reason. The pact created a
      south American alliance aimed at more stringent monitoring and control of foreign investment.(<a id="bck_fn0229" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0229">47</a>) The spokesman for the United Arab Emirates affirmed that the oil
      producing states shared the same problems that other raw material producers faced. For that reason, he said, the
      oil producers would continue to aid poorer third world nations.(<a id="bck_fn0230" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0230">48</a>) Many governments assured each other that it had been the unity of the third world
      that had forced the north to accept what the south identified as the only significant reform in the IMF since the
      U.S. decisions in 1971 had certified the beginning of the end of Bretton Woods. The developed nations allowed
      their caucus in the IMF, the Group of 10, to be expanded to "the Group of 20," including ten third
      world members, in inner councils where substantive reform of the monetary system was discussed.(<a id="bck_fn0231" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0231">49</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the same time, in 1972 the LDCs continued to discuss what a new economic order dedicated to "collective
      security" and earlier versions of their principles would look like. Most of the south's proposals had
      been heard before, and the few innovations followed directly from what had been proposed before. Chile argued
      that the global economic system should truly be made global by including eastern Europe and China.(<a id="bck_fn0232" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0232">50</a>) The Mexican delegate reiterated this position, using the
      opportunity to stress that the Soviet Union's economic duties to poorer states were very similar to those of
      the United States. Finally, the Mexican ambassador closed by extending the global aid doctrine that had been
      proposed by La Guardia in 1946. Mexico called for a global progressive income tax on nations. The duties of
      wealthy nations to poorer nations would be specified and vary with per capita wealth. And the relative financial
      needs of poorer states would be pinpointed the same way.(<a id="bck_fn0233" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0233">51</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      By the end of 1972 official pronouncements indicated as great a conscious unity among the LDCs as had existed in
      the mid-1960s. Yet many divisions remained below the surface. Unity had been achieved at the expense of advancing
      tactics beyond what they had been in 1967. "Collective economic security" symbolized a radicalization
      of the position taken by the more conservative third world states, but when translated into practical proposals
      for changing the international system "collective economic security" provided no more significant new
      policy directions for the Group of 77 as a whole than "collective self-reliance" had for the nonaligned
      states. Even though third world leaders discussed the creation of a global economic system that <a id="page_105"></a>would periodically redistribute wealth to poorer states, their proposals to achieve that goal had
      existed for years. The redistribution could happen through commodity agreements, increased aid, or the proposed
      Link, as well as through a global income tax on nations. But the third world position still lacked a coherent
      strategy for making any of these proposals a reality. Developing such a strategy would be difficult. Despite
      professions of third world unity and the new reasons for that unity stemming from American economic policy,
      differences in economic interest from region to region in the third world remained. Each of the differing
      interests had to be satisfied, at least in part, during any transition to a new order so that third world unity
      would not be shattered by the process of transition itself. That is what made inventing such strategies so
      difficult.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0025" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0025">Theory as a Source of Unity</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Before 1970, outside the international conferences on economic matters and more isolated from the requirements of
      day-to-day foreign economic policy making, groups of third world scholars had developed economic analyses that
      would expand the range of tactics available to the south and help cement the ideological basis for third world
      unity during the crucial period in the early seventies. Theories of dependency and neocolonialism appeared in
      every third world region in the late sixties. These theories stressed similarities among third world states
      rather than differences. They helped LDCs understand the rise of transnational firms and and the existence of
      impediments to the transfer of technology, the major new economic problems experienced by the third world in
      Bretton Woods system's heyday. At the same time, the new theories arose from and remained compatible with the
      analysis of global trade problems and of the promise of industrialization which the south had long accepted.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world scholars developed neocolonialism and dependency theories as a challenge to the
      "modernization" framework developed in the north.(<a id="bck_fn0234" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0234">52</a>) Modernization theorists look to the examples of the European states, the Soviet
      Union, the United States, and Japan to prove that economic development is similar everywhere. They ask,
      "What should people in underdeveloped countries do to develop quickly?" Dependency theorists, in
      contrast, hold that the wealth of developed nations and the poverty of underdeveloped nations are both results of
      the same global process, an ongoing process that continues to produce development in some regions of the world
      and underdevelopment in others.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The dependency framework actually existed in the third world before the modernization framework was developed. In
      the 1950s scholars in the newly independent <a id="page_106"></a>states confronted a conventional wisdom which
      said that any local economic development would have to be structured by the export requirements and political
      whims of the colonial powers.(<a id="bck_fn0235" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0235">53</a>) Likewise,
      Prebisch's early analysis of development in Latin America emphasized the greater power of the developed
      center to control the global production system, which restricted Latin American development.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Nonetheless, in the 1950s and 1960s few third world governments would accept a development policy analysis
      emphasizing dependency alone. The most prominent third world scholars shared the official view that the south had
      some control over its development. Prebisch's ECLA in Latin America and influential economists from the new
      states, such as Caribbean economist W. Arthur Lewis, emphasized possibilities for autonomous development through
      their advocacy of import-substitution policies and, later, of regional economic integration.(<a id="bck_fn0236" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0236">54</a>) In Africa decolonization theorists, including Fanon and Memmi as well
      as the many national independence leaders who were scholars in their own right, concentrated upon gaining
      political independence and called it the key to economic independence. Fanon and Memmi even said that
      intellectuals who concentrated too much on economic dependence were raising psychological barriers to national
      development.(<a id="bck_fn0237" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0237">55</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The emergent intellectual prominence of the dependency school in Latin America and the Caribbean and of studies
      of neocolonialism in Africa and other third world regions represented the legitimation of the dependency
      framework. In the late sixties dependency theorists became involved in the more official discourse on economic
      development, the discussion that went on in third world universities and United Nations research organizations.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In Africa the relegitimation of the dependency framework was relatively simple. Unlike Latin America states, few
      African governments developed a stake in defending the theories of economic modernization that deemphasized
      international structural constraints upon development. After decolonization African governments continued to
      emphasize the economic decisions made abroad that restricted African economic development — decisions made by (1)
      foreign consumers of African raw materials, (2) states and international agencies granting aid to the continent,
      and (3) potential foreign investors. Kwame Nkrumah's <span class="underline">Neocolonialism</span>, published
      in 1965, said that attempts to foster economic development through an open, outwardly-directed policy of
      encouraging foreign investment and exports was doomed. Nkrumah argued that the economies of developed capitalist
      states required exploitative world economic relations akin to colonialism to be continued after independence.
      Thus he appeared to repudiate the statement he had so often made before, a <a id="page_107"></a>sentiment shared
      by many other African independence leaders, that all else would follow once Africans had "seized the
      political kingdom."(<a id="bck_fn0238" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0238">56</a>) By 1970 the United Nations
      economic research unit in Africa, the Institute for Economic Planning and Development in Dakar, was promulgating
      the same thesis in the views of its Egyptian director, Marxist economist Samir Amin.(<a id="bck_fn0239" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0239">57</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In Latin America and the Caribbean the official emphasis both of national governments and the U.N. research arm,
      ECLA, was more on finding economic modernization policies available to governments rather than on searching for
      all forms of independence. While questions associated with the dependency framework tended to be ignored in the
      western hemisphere until the mid-sixties, Prebisch's analysis of trade dependency continued to be a
      foundation of later ECLA views.(<a id="bck_fn0240" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0240">58</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Further development of dependency ideas in Latin America began, according to dependency theorist Fernando
      Cardoso, when the failure of the modernization programs ECLA had advocated became clear. Import substitution and
      regional integration did not result in the type of development enjoyed by the societies that were the models of
      modernization.(<a id="bck_fn0241" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0241">59</a>) By 1965 ECLA economists were looking
      for new analyses of Latin American economies and, although the states that ECLA served did not support the
      development of dependency theory, the organization itself supported independent dependency scholars. In their
      view, histories of Latin American "dependency" could explain the failures of policies ECLA had
      advocated.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Norman Girvan and other Caribbean dependency theorists explain the relegitimation of their framework in their own
      region in the same way. Development policies influenced by the modernization framework had failed. Elements of
      the particular modernization theories that had been developed by local economists, especially Lewis, implied that
      dependency was real. Thus dependency ideas could easily be adopted by scholars in Caribbean universities and
      research institutes where research was officially directed toward solving development problems.(<a id="bck_fn0242" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0242">60</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      With the increasing legitimacy of the dependency framework came increasing legitimacy for specific historical
      explanations that many dependency theorists advocated. This analysis, in turn, entered the New International
      Economic Order ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Between 1968 and 1970 dependency theorists in both Latin America and the Caribbean published analyses of the
      forms dependency had taken since the second world war. (<a id="bck_fn0243" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0243">61</a>) They emphasized the increasing significance of transnational firms. Such firms just
      represented the latest way that economies of developing states were transformed to serve the developed world.
      Dependency scholars unraveled the strings of dependency tied by TNCs. They distinguished the effects of profits
      <a id="page_108"></a>repatriated to TNC home countries from the effects of TNCs' monopolies of industrial
      technology and from the ways TNCs strengthened certain elites in developing countries. In sum, the dependency
      theorists argued that because TNCs had industrial monopolies, third world elites had to pay monopoly rents in
      order to get the technology needed for development. If a southern nation's elite encouraged development
      through TNC direct investment, the tendency of TNCs to repatriate would take away the development advantages. If
      the elite tried to buy industrial technologies, they would have to maintain the traditional export sector in
      order to obtain the large amount of foreign exchange needed to buy capital goods from TNCs abroad. Neither policy
      allowed real development, that is, the ability to leave a dependent position in the world economy.(<a id="bck_fn0244" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0244">62</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      After the American actions in 1971 — which by 1972 the U.N. Secretariat had directly linked to increased payments
      deficits in most LDCs — many third world officials adopted some of the dependency analysis of TNCs. They linked
      this analysis of TNCs to the problem of development programs becoming highly dependent on an increasingly
      difficult-to-maintain positive balance of payments. Third world states had to have payments surpluses in order to
      afford more capital goods from abroad. Southern officials placed this analysis under the moral rubric of
      states' duties to aid the economic development of other states. The 1972 Peruvian and Chilean U.N. delegates
      argued that corporations should be required to live under a code of conduct that would limit repatriated
      profits.(<a id="bck_fn0245" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0245">63</a>) The delegate from Uruguay argued that DMC
      governments should facilitate the direct transfer of technology and bypass TNCs.(<a id="bck_fn0246" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0246">64</a>) The U.N. Economic and Social Council adopted a resolution in June 1972 that
      triggered most of the U.N.'s subsequent investigations of TNCs and the transfer of technology. Subsequent
      U.N. studies reflected dependency analysis. They presented the rise of TNCs as a logical consequence of the
      postwar international economy. Poorer states that had few powers to control firms became victims, unlike the
      wealthier states (where most TNC investment actually occurs). In response, the U.N. proposed providing
      alternative sources of modern technology and improving the negotiating skills of third world officials who dealt
      with TNCs.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Dependency theory contributed much more to the new order ideology than an analysis of TNCs and the transfer of
      technology. More significant was the dependency theorists' concentration on global structures that affected
      all third world nations to the exclusion of analysis of regional differences in the third world. That emphasis
      contributed to third world unity.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The effectiveness of dependency theories in this regard is again related to their increasing legitimacy.
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      <a id="page_109"></a>By 1970 dependency and neocolonialism theorists held prestigious jobs in universities in all
      third world regions as well as in the African and Latin American U.N. research arms.(<a id="bck_fn0247" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0247">65</a>) They used the resources of their professional positions to increase their
      contacts with those who shared the same perspective in other parts of the third world and in developed countries
      through individual meetings and conferences. In 1968, for example, Andre Gunder Frank, whose dependency ideas
      affected Latin America, met with Samir Amin.(<a id="bck_fn0248" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0248">66</a>) One
      conference among dependency scholars in 1972 resulted in a sort of textbook of dependency analysis, an issue of
      the West Indian journal <span class="underline">Social and Economic Studies</span>. All of the articles appeared
      in English, what Cardoso calls the "Latin" of contemporary world scholarship.(<a id="bck_fn0249" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0249">67</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The international spread of dependency theory extended beyond the southern regions on either side of the
      Atlantic. Asian scholars and government officials, like their Atlantic counterparts, became disgruntled with
      modernization ideas of the 1960s. One of the foremost Asian policy analysts who changed his mind was Mahbub ul
      Haq, once planning minister of Pakistan and later World Bank vice president. His 1976 study. <span class="underline">The Poverty Curtain</span>, contains a compelling personal account of how he came to reject the
      modernization theories which had guided his unsuccessful planning.(<a id="bck_fn0250" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0250">68</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Ul Haq personally contributed to the donscious unity of third world scholars behind the new order ideology. By
      1972 he, like the Latin American dependency theorists, felt that adherence to northern models of modernization by
      third world planners was a form of ideological dependence. He summarizes his thoughts then:
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      Should we [third world scholars] not establish our own institutions of intellectual self-reliance . . . which
      would give form and substance to our aimless search for appropriate development strategies at home and our
      disorganized efforts to coordinate our negotiating positions abroad?(<a id="bck_fn0251" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0251">69</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      With a group of other third world scholars in U.N. positions including Gamani Corea (Secretary General of
      UNCTAD), Enrique Inglesias, (Executive Secretary of ECLA), and Samir Amin, ul Haq created the Third World Forum
      in 1973, a group dedicated to "intellectual self-reliance."
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The forum never became a major source of new dependency ideas: it simply supports the efforts of the south to
      gain the New International Economic Order. It never speaks out against the ruling elite of any developing state.
      It does not analyze class struggles within LDCs, although shifting class relations are the characteristics of
      dependency and neocolonialism that most interest those dependency theorists with fewer <a id="page_110"></a>government ties now, a decade after the forum was created.(<a id="bck_fn0252" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0252">70</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The creation of the forum, nonetheless, brought part of the dependency framework into a significant position in
      the international debate. By agreeing to the forum's first statement in 1973, the directors of UNCTAD, ECLA,
      the U.N. Institute in Africa, and the most prominent Asian economist in the international organization system
      went on record affirming that all third world states shared the same international structural impediments to
      development.(<a id="bck_fn0253" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0253">71</a>) None of those agencies or individuals
      could have been expected to conduct or disseminate research that emphasized contradictory regional economic
      interests from that point forward.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In addition to providing a further basis for treating the LDCs' economic problems as a unit, dependency
      theorists directly helped to resolve the tactical dilemma faced by third world governments when they tried to
      find ways to change the international system. Positing strong systemic, rather than domestic, sources of
      development and underdevelopment reinforced the view that only fundamental changes in the international system
      would work. In the dependency theorists' view, the fact that some people in developed states actually
      benefited from the underdevelopment of other regions made it naive to expect DMC leaders to change the system in
      response to rational, moral arguments alone. In fact, some third world intellectuals such as Nigerian
      social-historian Chinweizu concluded that the south's concern with democratic procedures indicated
      ideological dependence on northern political theory as great as the ideological dependence that many southern
      economists had on northern modernization theory.(<a id="bck_fn0254" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0254">72</a>) As
      a result, by 1973 more aggressive approaches to convincing northern nations to change the global economic system
      became commonplaces of third world rhetoric. The resolutions of the September 1973 meeting of the nonaligned
      states in Algiers illustrate the trend. They decried "dependence and neocolonialism" arguing that
      ". . . the developing counties in general are still subject directly or indirectly to imperialist
      domination." The nonaligned states attacked "ideological domination" by the developed states and
      called for collective economic security measures. They even demanded that the scope of United Nations concerns
      with security should be expanded to include economic matters.(<a id="bck_fn0255" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0255">73</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Surprisingly, the same views that contributed to this aggressive tone also indirectly provided third world
      officials with a stronger basis from which they could negotiate a new order with the north. The dependency
      theorists' concentration on finding impediments to development still affecting all third world states allowed
      third world leaders to resolve the differences between the few radical states that still affirmed the <a id="page_111"></a>restitution ethic and the other states that based their argument upon the permanent rights and
      duties of states.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Under the dependency framework governments of states which had long been independent could argue for restitution
      for current "exploitation," say by transnational firms, as easily as new states could. Older states
      could even link those claims to a colonialism that was long dead. Only the form of dependence, not its substance,
      had changed. When ul Haq was in the process of changing his views about development, he wrote one of the more
      entertaining explanations of this view as comment on <span class="underline">Partners in Development</span>
      requested by Barbara Ward. He noted that India had long been a "partner in development" with Britain.
      Throughout Britain's colonial rule India provided her with capital. Based on rough figures, with low interest
      rates, Britain "owed" India about half a trillion dollars in 1970. Of course, he said, Britain would be
      in no position to pay that, and India, concerned with stability in the world economy, would not want Britain to
      go broke trying to do so. Nonetheless, ul Haq had an imaginary northern friend who did not believe in
      renegotiating debts and would insist that Britain pay now. In contrast, ul Haq argued that the debt just
      indicated why Britain should take part in negotiating a more stable and fairer international economic order for
      the future.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Employing a more conventional dependency analysis, other leaders of older third world states adopted the same
      position. The Mexican government of Luis Echeverria used the "restitution duty" in 1971 and 1972 as an
      argument that northern states should approve the creation of an international Charter of Economic Rights and
      Duties of States.(<a id="bck_fn0257" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0257">75</a>) The working group that was to
      write the charter was approved by UNCTAD III in Santiago. The group was to derive the charter from prior
      principles — the UNCTAD trade principles of 1964, the 1968 Charter of Algiers, and the ideas about the right of
      every nation to develop agreed upon by the Group of 77 immediately before UNCTAD III.(<a id="bck_fn0258" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0258">76</a>) All of these principles pointed to an economic order bounded by the rights and
      duties of states first proposed in the 1940s. The actual charter reflected that ethic rather than the restitution
      ethic used to explain why the north should agree to the creation of the charter in the first place.(<a id="bck_fn0259" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0259">77</a>) The charter debates thus illustrate the place that was
      found for the restitution ethic in the new order ideology before 1974. It became just one reason why colonial and
      neocolonial northern states should negotiate toward the new order.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Thus, the reason ideas about dependency and neocolonialism were so rapidly included in the new order ideology in
      the early seventies was very simple. In one sense a dependency framework had always been the structure of the
      economic analysis proposed by third world governments in international meetings. Since the <a id="page_112"></a>forties, Asian, African, and Latin American delegates had said that optimal third world
      development was impeded by global economic structures neither created nor controlled by the third world itself.
      The adoption of the particular structural analysis of transnational firms and of the problems of technology
      transfer was facilitated by the fact that these were relatively new, relatively unstudied issues which bothered
      many third world states. Dependency theory provided a readily available explanation of these new problems without
      contradicting any other third world assumptions. The real frustrations that third world economic planners felt
      with northern models of development encouraged them to adopt the dependency framework as well. So did the felt
      need for the continued political unity of the third world, which could only be achieved by deemphasizing the
      economic differences among southern states and by finding a position for the different third world views about
      ethics in a unified ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Dependency theory by itself did not convince southern policy makers to abandon northern economic models or
      reunify the principles underlying new order policy analysis. Active leadership had to turn the potential provided
      by dependency ideas into actual contributions to the third world alliance and its ideology. Ul Haq and other
      third world scholars, Echeverria and his government, and others all convinced members of the alliance to
      emphasize southern unity. The leaders used compelling arguments from the dependency framework: Third world
      intellectual life was ideologically dependent on the north. All third world states had experienced colonial
      dependence in the past and continued to experience neocolonial dependence today. These arguments, in turn, became
      part of the new order ideology.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0026" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0026">Leadership and the 1974 Nieo
    Program</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Intellectual and political leaders of the third world had further major effects on the emerging ideology in early
      1970s. The most dramatic example of effective third world leadership was Egypt's organization of Arab OPEC
      members to use the "oil weapon" as part of the Egyptian strategy in the October 1973 war against
      Israel. (<a id="bck_fn0260" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0260">78</a>) While the preconditions for this successful
      strategy — the existence of petroleum-dependent developed nations — were created in part by the success of the
      expanding global liberal economy, the direct target of the strategy was hardly the postwar economic system
      itself. The "oil weapon" was a tactic designed not to create the New International Economic Order, but
      to aid Egypt in its rapid strike against Israel. Nonetheless, the decision made by all OPEC members — <a id="page_113"></a>including Iran, a supporter of Israel — to raise the world price of oil soon after the Arab OPEC
      members had stopped oil sales to Israel's developed allies was reinforced by the Arab boycott. And the
      decision to raise prices was aimed at changing the world economy. As a result of the price increases and the
      disruption in the global system for allocating oil caused by the boycott, DMC governments became eager to to
      engage in discussions about "resource interdependence." To put it another way, DMCs were interested in
      discussing reform of some aspects of the postwar trade system because they themselves had experienced problems
      the system could not cope with and even helped generate. Self-selected leaders of the third world, in particular
      the governments of Algeria and Iran, seized the chance presented by the OPEC price increases to catalyze the
      Group of 77 to organize and present its long-standing demands in the most coherent and comprehensive way
      possible.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In January 1974 Honari Boumedienne, the president of Algeria, called upon the Secretary General of the United
      Nations to organize a special session of the General Assembly to discuss matters of raw material production,
      trade, and development.(<a id="bck_fn0261" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0261">79</a>) Boumedienne found himself in
      an unusually strong position to make such a request. He was president of one of the more radical Arab oil states
      and thus the target of DMC requests that the oil issue be discussed internationally. He was also the official,
      temporary leader of the nonaligned states. Leadership passed to the local head of government in the country where
      the group's last meeting had taken place. In 1974 the Algerians took an unusual step by employing some of the
      power inherent in what was meant to be a purely routine position by making their request in the name of the
      nonaligned movement.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The request for a General Assembly session found immediate support not only from the nonaligned states but from
      all other members of the Group of 77 as well as the DMC governments. The U.N. Secretary General was ready to call
      the session immediately. He delayed only because the Group of 77 asked that it be postponed until the group could
      meet and prepare a more detailed positions.(<a id="bck_fn0262" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0262">80</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The story of the group's consultations between February and April 1974 has yet to be told in detail. It will
      probably be a very dull one. Yet the result was something that appeared to be fundamentally new — a defiant call
      for international trade, finance, and monetary systems that would amend or replace those that were already
      existing. In substance, though, all the proposals for the NIEO, all the economic analysis offered by the Group of
      77 at the Sixth Special Session of the General Assembly, and all the principles underlying that analysis were
      quite old. The two months between the time the Secretary General wanted to meet and the time the conference
      actually began was a little less than the time <a id="page_114"></a>usually needed to conduct the regional
      meetings and full Group of 77 meeting before the more routine UNCTADs. Few new issues could have encumbered the
      group's deliberations.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      One that certainly did was the adverse effects that the OPEC price hikes were bound to have in the third world.
      As one U.N. official puts it "anti-imperialism" assured that the third world supported the OPEC
      action.(<a id="bck_fn0263" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0263">81</a>) And if that was not enough, members of the
      group could rely upon an Iranian proposal that the OPEC states manifest the duty incumbent upon them with their
      new wealth by aiding the states most seriously affected by the price increases.(<a id="bck_fn0264" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0264">82</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      What was new at the Sixth Special Session was the discipline Group of 77 members showed in their support of the
      NIEO "Declaration and Programme of Action." A few group members, particularly Iran and Algeria, guided
      the debate. The Iranian delegation made many of both the substantive and procedural motions and, more than any
      other single delegation, responded to northern objections to the new order program.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The Sixth Special Session did not turn out to be the substantive debate on the oil question that the DMCs wanted.
      In a limited sense, it was quite the opposite. The meeting served to legitimate OPEC price actions by having them
      approved by the assembly as a whole. That, no doubt, was one of the Algerian and Iranian goals. More
      significantly, for the first time the General Assembly approved a massive resolution covering all of the economic
      issues the third world had raised since the second world war. The resolution touched on sovereignty over national
      resources, improving terms of trade through international regulation of trade based on equitable treatment,
      reforming the global monetary system to include an aid component, expanding concessionary multilateral aid,
      providing debt relief, controlling ΤNTCs, promoting international support for industrialization, and reforming
      the United Nations system to give third world governments greater control over international economic decisions.
      When presented together, the proposals outlined a very different order than the one that existed in 1974.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Despite the fact that the new order proposals of spring 1974 were internally coherent and covered all third world
      issues, they could hardly become "one of the most important bases for relations between all peoples and
      nations" as they claimed they would. The proposals did not include sympathetic responses to the specific DMC
      concerns with monetary problems and resource vulnerabilities which had been exposed so recently. Rather, leaders
      of the third world had simply used the opportunity given by the growing DMC concern with its resource dependence
      — the willingness of DMC governments to hold a special session on resource matters — in order <a id="page_115"></a>to reiterate the south's position and make it more widely known.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Likewise, at the regular General Assembly session in the fall of 1974 leaders of the third world continued to use
      their limited powers to assure that the south's position was fully, coherently presented. General Assembly
      routine gave Algeria the presidency that year. Daniel Patrick Moynihan argues that the Algerians used the chair
      to railroad the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States over DMC objections, again eschewing substantive
      debate on the sort of new international economic system that was possible.(<a id="bck_fn0265" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0265">83</a>) The charter, the result of Echeverría's initiative in 1972, was the most explicit
      and comprehensive statement of new order principles in a decade. It completed the statement of the new order
      program begun with the NIEO declaration in the spring.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The leaders of the third world who helped bring about these statements — Boumedienne, Echeverria and their
      governments, other OPEC governments, and some Arab states — did so for their own reasons. Personal, domestic, and
      regional interests played as much a role for them as the goals of the third world alliance. What Yoram Shapira
      says of Echeverria can be applied equally well to the others. Echeverria came to the U.N. in 1971 to publicize
      attacks on the trade restrictions imposed by the new American economic policy, and he argued for the charter in
      Santiago because, as Shapira says, Echeverria
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      . . . perceived a radical transformation of the international system as necessary for furnishing a solution to
      domestic problems and a national malaise.(<a id="bck_fn0266" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0266">84</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      The leaders of the third world retained more specific allegiances to their own nations. They organized third
      world reaction to the signs of breakdown in the Bretton Woods system — the U.S. decisions in 1971, the DMCs'
      oil vulnerabilities — in order to advance international changes they considered important to their national
      interests. Third world leaders in the early seventies were not selected by some sort of competitive politics
      within the alliance because of their special commitment to alliance goals. They selected themselves. The leaders
      were those governments that took the opportunities offered by the evolving politics of international economic
      relations to create leadership roles for themselves. Those opportunities occurred both because the third world
      alliance itself had evolved so that, for example, the apparent leader of the nonaligned movement had some clout,
      and because unintended consequences of the expanding postwar global economy had created some specific ways in
      which the north was vulnerable to third world power.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0027" class="item1"><a id="page_116"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0027">Responses to Northern
    Initiatives</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Some DMC scholars and policy makers linked those unintended consequences of postwar growth that they first felt
      in the early seventies to global issues broader than the inadequacy of the gold-dollar based monetary system or
      the vulnerability of mass-production economies that used foreign oil. In the early seventies northern scholars
      rediscovered "resource limits to growth" and logically and emotionally linked them to the subsequent
      oil shortages created by the oil weapon and the OPEC price increases.(<a id="bck_fn0267" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0267">85</a>) Northerners brought problems associated with these "limits" to
      international conferences as early as the U.N. conference on the environment held at Stockholm in 1972. Northern
      spokesmen argued strongly that environmental pollution coming from increasing industrialization was a global
      problem. Later, directly after the Sixth Special Session, a U.N. conference on population met. There, northern
      spokesmen linked rapid population growth to an increasingly rapid approach to global resource limits.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The immediate implications of both of these arguments were detrimental to the south's new order position.
      Even so, many of the original limits-to-growth scholars had advocated redistribution of the world's
      wealth.(<a id="bck_fn0268" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0268">86</a>) But the existence of environmental limits to
      growth could imply that new industrialization in the unindustrialized third world should be stopped. And when the
      population problem was seen as a global issue it implied that population control rather than industrialization
      should be the first priority of third world development.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In response to these issues third world scholars promulgated analyses of world society suggesting that the
      environmental consequences of third world development and the south's population problem were minor. In doing
      so these scholars expanded the new order ideology to include answers to problems that had first been relevant
      only to developed states. While the initial southern answers were not all that sympathetic to northern concerns,
      for the first time the new order ideology was dealing with "global" problems first perceived by the
      north as such in addition to the "global" problems that only the ideology's southern adherents
      felt.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Environmental degradation appeared as a "limits to growth" problem of the seventies before the
      population question did. In fact, ul Haq's experiment in "intellectual self-reliance," the Third
      World Forum, began as a response to northern concerns with environmental limits to growth, to the exclusion of
      development, at Stockholm.(<a id="bck_fn0269" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0269">87</a>) But the LDC view rapidly
      moved closer to the northern position taken there. In <a id="page_117"></a>1972 the nonaligned states took the
      position that environmental control was not a problem relevant to third world states except to the degree that
      environmental controls might imply "... additional costs of development ... for developing
      countries."(<a id="bck_fn0270" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0270">88</a>) By 1973 the south was stating this
      concern as an incidence of states' economic rights and duties:
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      The heads of State or Government of nonaligned countries stress that environmental measures adopted by one state
      should not adversely affect the environment of other states, or zones outside their jurisdiction.(<a id="bck_fn0271" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0271">89</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      This peculiar article repeated the language of the demand more frequently heard in the north that one
      country's pollution should not be allowed to adversely affect other countries. Apparently the cost of
      cleaning up pollution remained the nonaligned states' major concern. Nonetheless at the same conference the
      nonaligned states affirmed:
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      Any infringement of the right of effective control by any state over its national resources and their
      exploitation by means suited to its own situation, <span class="underline">having respect for the ecological
      balance</span>, is contrary to the alms and principles of the United Nations Charter and hampers the development
      of international cooperation . . . [emphasis added]
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      In responding to a northern issue, the issue itself, international principles to maintain the environment, became
      part of the NIEO ideology. Ultimately, the issue was reflected in Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
      as its final operative article (#30)<span class="bold">:</span>
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      The protection, preservation, and enhancement of the environment for the present and future generations is the
      responsibility of all States. All States shall endeavor to establish their own environmental and development
      policies in conformity with such responsibility . . . All states should cooperate in evolving international norms
      and regulations in the field of the environment.(<a id="bck_fn0271a" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0271a">90</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      This article contains the only principles of states ' economic rights and duties not found previously in the
      1964 UNCTAD principles, the 1968 Charter of Algiers, or the principles advocated by the Group of 77 immediately
      before UNCTAD III. It is a "northern" principle integrated into the south's ethic.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The story of the population issue is quite different. The northern concern with limiting population <a id="page_118"></a>growth in order to slow the rush toward global economic limits was rejected by third world
      governments as a whole, just as the previous emphasis on population control in the Pearson Report had been. The
      1974 population conference approved a "World Population Plan of Action" dedicated to economic
      development, not to population control. As the plan's objectives state:
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      Population policies are constituent elements of socio-economic development policies, never substitutes for
      them.(<a id="bck_fn0272" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0272">91</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world intellectual leaders, joined by northern supporters, turned the emphasis on population control aside
      more directly. "The Cocoyoc Declaration" of a U.N. conference called in Mexico under the direction of
      Barbara Ward and including forum members Amin, Corea, and ul Haq concluded:
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      A North American child or European child, on average, consumes outrageously more than his Indian or African
      counterpart — a fact which makes it specious to attribute pressure on world resources entirely to the growth of
      Third World population.(<a id="bck_fn0273" href="Ch04.xhtml#fn0273">92</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      Thus, the concern for population control never became part of the new order ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Perhaps the contrasting ways the LDCs reacted to these two northern issues in the early 1970s can be explained by
      the intellectual merits of the northern arguments alone. There is certainly little basis for the assumption that
      population growth in the LDCs will cause us to quickly approach resource limits to growth, at least as long as
      the global distribution of wealth remains as it is now. One the other hand, there is little reason to expect that
      third world industrialization will contribute much to world pollution unless the pace of industrialization
      increases markedly. And third world population growth would make us rapidly approach resource limits if it
      continued after a new, more equitable world order was realized.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The real explanation for the different ways new order advocates handled these northern issues involves more than
      the relative merits of the the arguments. It has to do with the compatibility of each issue with prior third
      world opinions. Environmental regulation could be seen as a duty of resource owners under the third world ethic.
      Population control, perhaps, might have been seen as a similar duty of states. But the north had previously
      proposed population control as a universally valid development policy. That represented a violation of the
      general principle of a state's right to choose its own development path. Population control for development
      can <a id="page_119"></a>never become a third world position as long as some individual third world states have
      cultural or religious opposition to contraception, because each state has a right to such opposition according to
      the south views of the rights and duties of states.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Despite the LDC rejection of the population issue, the major story of emergent NIEO ideology in the first half of
      the seventies was still one of "northern" issues — the economic problems of developed states, the
      reactions of their governments to those problems, and the reaction of the south to northern actions.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the short-term there is no doubt that the most dramatic action taken by any of the developing states in the
      early seventies, the oil price increases, only made northern problems worse, just as the price increases made the
      immediate economic problems for most southern states much worse. And the NIEO program itself offered nothing to
      solve the monetary and trade problems the north experienced. Nonetheless, if only with the environmental issue,
      third world governments did demonstrate the ability to accept some northern issues as their own. This was an
      especially important development. If the new order program was to have anything approaching the significance that
      the south expected in 1974, it would have to deal with northern problems as well as southern ones. Despite the
      grand rhetoric at the Sixth Special Session, a working new order would have to be supported by the developed
      nations.
    </div>

    <div class="footnote">
      <h2 id="ht0028" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0028">Notes</a></h2>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0183">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0183">(1)</a>Barbara Ward, <span class="underline">Economist</span>, May 18,
        1974, p. 65. <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, General Assembly Resolution 3201: Declaration
        on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, May 1, 1974, p. 893.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0184">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0184">(2)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Lusaka
        Declarations, Sept. 10, 1970, pp. 194-203; General Assembly Resolution 2626: International Development Strategy
        for the Second Development Decade, Oct. 24, 1970, pp. 856-65.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0185">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0185">(3)</a>Lusaka Declaration, p. 197.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0186">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0186">(4)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., p. 199.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0187">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0187">(5)</a>The "least developed" category was accepted by UNCTAD
        in 1964. The first U.N. list identifying those states, a list needed before any policy could be implemented,
        proposed in early 1971, <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Report of the Committee for
        Development Policy, Apr, 1, 1971, p. 869. The list included sixteen states in Africa, eight in Asia and
        Oceania, and one in Latin America. It was not until the autumn 1971 session that the General Assembly approved
        the list.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0188">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0188">(6)</a>Lusaka Declarations, p. 203.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0189">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0189">(7)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., p. 199.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0190">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0190">(8)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., p. 195.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0191">
        <a id="page_120"></a><a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0191">(9)</a>See Tanzanian President Julius
        Nyerere's comments on Yugoslavia and China made in 1970, <span class="underline">Freedom and
        Development</span> (London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1973), pp.147-497 237.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0192">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0192">(10)</a>Henry Bienen, <span class="underline">Tanzania: Party
        Transformation and Economic Development</span> (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press. 1970), pp. 403-47.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0193">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0193">(11)</a>Nyerere, pp. 232-39.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0194">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0194">(12)</a>See Nyerere's biography by William E. Smith, <span class="underline">We Must Run While They Walk</span> (New York: Random House, 1971), p. 3.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0195">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0195">(13)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, General
        Assembly Resolution 2768: Identification of the Least Developed Among the Less Developed Countries, " Nov.
        18, 1971, p. 868.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0196">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0196">(14)</a>Fred L. Block, <span class="underline">The Origins of
        International Economic Disorder</span> (Berkeley: Univ. of Calif. Press, 1977), p. 197.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0197">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0197">(15)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 198.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0198">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0198">(16)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, pp. 70-108.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0199">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0199">(17)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 197.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0200">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0200">(18)</a>Block calls the action ". . .a blatant violation of rules
        governing international trade." p. 203.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0201">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0201">(19)</a>OECD, <span class="underline">Development Cooperation: 1973
        Review</span> (Paris: OECD, 1973), p. 14.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0202">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0202">(20)</a>See the summary of the report by the U.N. Secretariat,
        <span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Sept. 25, 1972, p. 7.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0203">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0203">(21)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 25, Sept. 18, 1970, p.
        4.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0204">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0204">(22)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 6, 1971, p.
        31? Oct. 8, 1971, p. 72.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0205">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0205">(23)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 12, 1971, p.
        84; Oct. 5, 1971, p. 35.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0206">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0206">(24)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 12, 1971, p.
        84.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0207">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0207">(25)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 6, 1971, p.
        31.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0208">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0208">(26)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 11, 1971, p.
        79; Oct. 12., 1971, p. 98.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0209">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0209">(27)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 5, 1971, p.
        62.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0210">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0210">(28)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 8, 1971, p.
        53.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0211">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0211">(29)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 12, 1971, p.
        91.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0212">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0212">(30)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 7, 1971, p.
        53.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0213">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0213">(31)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 1, 1971. p.
        79.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0214">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0214">(32)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 12, 1971, p.
        98.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0215">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0215">(33)</a>Regional pacts of producers acting to increase prices were
        discussed within the United Nations in the 1940s. Cocoa producing nations restricted supplies to raise prices,
        without success, in the early 1960s.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0216">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0216">(34)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 12, 1971, p.
        84.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0217">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0217">(35)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, African
        Ministerial Meeting Preparatory to UNCTAD III, Oct. 14, 1971, p. 243.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0218">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0218">(36)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Consensus
        of Lima, Oct. 13, 1971.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0219">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0219">(37)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Lima
        Declaration and Programme of Action, Nov. 7, 1971, p. 278.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0220">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0220">(38)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Declaration
        of Ministerial Meeting of the "Asian Group of 77, Oct. 7, 1971, p. 213.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0221">
        <a id="page_121"></a><a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0221">(39)</a>Lima Declaration, p. 276.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0222">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0222">(40)</a>The Declaration of Ministerial Meeting of the Asian Group of
        77 says, "[We]. . . consequently believe that the unified expression of shared hopes and aspirations by
        Ministers representing the overwhelming majority of mankind would go a long way in evoking favorable responses
        from the international community in particular from the Peoples and Governments of the developed states."
        p. 215.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0223">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0223">(41)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 12, 1971, p.
        99.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0224">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0224">(42)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, UNCTAD III:
        Resolution and Other Decisions, May 12, 1972, pp. 346-47, 352-53.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0225">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0225">(43)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, pp. 320-21.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0226">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0226">(44)</a>Daniel Patrick Moynihan, <span class="underline">A Dangerous
        Place</span> (Boston: Little Brown, 1978), p. 50.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0227">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0227">(45)</a>The articles were triggered by a series of revelations in Jack
        Anderson's political column beginning on March 21.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0228">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0228">(46)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Oct. 10, 1972, pp.
        77-78. Robert F. Meagher identifies "collective economic security" as a Brazilian idea. <span class="underline">An International Redistribution of Wealth and Power: A Study of the Charter of Economic Rights and
        Duties of States</span> (New York: Pergamon Press, 1979), p. 47.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0229">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0229">(47)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Oct. 3, 1972, pp.
        33-34.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0230">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0230">(48)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Oct. 9, 1972, p.
        89.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0231">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0231">(49)</a>Chile, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Sept. 29,
        1972, p. 20; Peru, Oct. 3, 1972, p. 33.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0232">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0232">(50)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Sept. 29, 1972, p.
        17.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0233">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0233">(51)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Oct. 5, 1972, p.
        50.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0234">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0234">(52)</a>Fernando H. Cardoso, "The Originality of a Copy: CEPAL
        and the Idea of Development," <span class="underline">CEPAL Review</span> 22 (Second Half of 1977): 33-36.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0235">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0235">(53)</a>G. E. Cumper, "Dependence, Development, and the Sociology
        of Economic Theory," <span class="underline">Social and Economic Studies</span> 23 (Sept. 1974): 466.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0236">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0236">(54)</a>Norman Girvan, "The Development of Dependency
        Economics," <span class="underline">Social and Economic Studies</span> 22 (Mar. 1973): p. 2
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0237">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0237">(55)</a>Franz Fanon, <span class="underline">The Wretched of the
        Earth</span> (New York: Grove Press, 1963); Albert Memmi, <span class="underline">The Colonizer and the
        Colonized</span> (New York: Orion Press, 1965).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0238">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0238">(56)</a> Kwame Nkrumah, <span class="underline">Neocolonialism: The
        Last Stage of Imperialism</span> (London: Nelson, 1965).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0239">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0239">(57)</a>C. C. Stewart, "Center-Periphery and Unequal Exchange:
        Origins and Growth of Economic Doctrine," Presented at the joint annual meeting of the African Studies
        Association and the Latin American Studies Association, Houston, Nov. 1977, p. 7.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0240">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0240">(58)</a>Cardoso, "Originality of a Copy," p. 14.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0241">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0241">(59)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 35.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0242">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0242">(60)</a>Girvan, pp. 11-18.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0243">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0243">(61)</a>See the summary of works from the early seventies in Fernando
        H. Cardoso, "The Consumption of Dependency Theory in the United States," <span class="underline">Latin American Research</span> <a id="page_122"></a><span class="underline">Revie</span>w 7 (Pall
        1977): 18-21.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0244">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0244">(62)</a> Theotonio Dos Santos, "Dependency and
        Underdevelopment," <span class="underline">American Economic Review</span> 60, no. 2 (1970): 231-36.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0245">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0245">(63)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Sept. 29, 1972, p.
        17; Oct. 3, 1972, p. 33.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0246">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0246">(64)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, Oct. 10, 1972, p. 79.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0247">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0247">(65)</a>See Girvan, and see Cardoso, "The Consumption of
        Dependency Theory."
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0248">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0248">(66)</a>Stewart, p. 7.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0249">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0249">(67)</a><span class="underline">Social and Economic Studies</span>, 22
        (Mar. 1973); Cardoso, "The Consumption of Dependency Theory," p. 8.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0250">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0250">(68)</a>Mahbub ul Haq, <span class="underline">The Poverty
        Curtain</span> (New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1976).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0251">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0251">(69)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 84.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0252">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0252">(70)</a>AnaIysis of social stratification within the third world has
        always been a theme of dependency writers and has become more prominent as time goes on. For example, see
        Fernando H. Cardoso and Enzo Paletto, <span class="underline">Dependency and Development in Latin
        America</span> (Berkeley: Univ. of Calif Press, 1979), a translation and reprinting of an earlier work. The
        preface discusses the role of class analysis in dependency studies.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0253">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0253">(71)</a>Ul Haq, p. 84.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0254">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0254">(72)</a>Chinweizu, <span class="underline">The West and the Rest of
        Us</span> (New York: Random House, 1975), pp. 234-46.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0255">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0255">(73)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Fourth
        Summit of Non-Aligned Countries, Sept. 9, 1973, pp. 423-26.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit">
        (74)Ul Haq, pp. 140-41.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0257">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0257">(75)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 26, Oct. 11, 1971, p.
        79; <span class="underline">Second</span>, 27, Oct. 5, 1972, p. 49.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0258">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0258">(76)</a> <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, UNCTAD
        III: Resolutions and Other Decisions, May 12, Γ972, pp. 58-59.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0259">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0259">(77)</a><span class="underline">Selected Document</span>s, General
        Assembly Resolution 3281: Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, Dec. 12, 1974, pp. 901-906. Only one
        of the thirty-four articles, article 16, refers to restitution required of states continuing colonialism,
        aggression, neocolonialism, racial discrimination, and apartheid.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0260">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0260">(78)</a>Heikal, Mohamed, <span class="underline">The Road to
        Ramadam</span> (London: Collins, 1975), pp. 268-74.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0261">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0261">(79)</a>O<span class="underline">fficial Records of the General
        Assembly Sixth Special Session</span>, Plenary Meetings (New York: United Nations, 1976), p. vii.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0262">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0262">(80)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0263">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0263">(81)</a>J. Singh, <span class="underline">A New International Economic
        Order</span> (New York: Praeger, 1977), p. 4.<span class="italic">.</span>
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0264">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0264">(82)</a>Ultimately the proposal resulted in U.N. action aiding the
        "most seriously affected countries," <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, pp. 920-22.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0265">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0265">(83)</a>Moynihan, p. 151.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0266">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0266">(84)</a>Yoram Shapira, "Mexico's Foreign Policy Under
        Echeverria: A Retrospect," <span class="underline">InterAmerican Economic Affairs</span> 31 (Spring 1978):
        30.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0267">
        <a id="page_123"></a><a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0267">(85)</a>Donella Meadows et. al, The <span class="underline">Limits to Growth</span> (Washington: Potomac Associates, 1972 ) . See <span class="italic">M</span>oynihan'"s comment on the significance of limits to growth ideas, p. 51.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0268">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0268">(86)</a> Advocates of economic theories that take into account limits
        to growth tend to desire greater regional and personal economic equality.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0269">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0269">(87)</a>Ul Haq, p. 84.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0270">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0270">(88)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Georgetown
        Declaration and Programme of Action, Aug. 12, 1972, p. 390.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0271">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0271">(89)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Fourth
        Summit of the Non-Aligned Countries, Sept. 9, 1973, p. 417.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0271a">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0271a">(90)</a> Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, p. 906.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0272">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0272">(91)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, World
        Population Conference, Aug. 30, 1974, p. 475.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0273">
        <a href="Ch04.xhtml#bck_fn0273">(92)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Cocoyoc
        Declaration, Oct. 12, 1975, p. 500.
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
