<div class="delete">

<h1 id="ht0029"><a id="page_124"></a><a id="page_125"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0029">4
    <br class="calibre1"/>
    The Debate Since 1974</a></h1>
<div class="quotes">
<div class="text_noindent">
        If history is to be our guide, I believe that we may be on the threshold of a historical turning point. On the
        national level such a turning point was reached in the United States in the 1930s when the New Deal elevated
        the working class to partners in development and accepted them as an essential part of the consuming society.
        On the international level we have still not arrived at the philosophical breakthrough when the development of
        the poor nations is considered an essential element in the sustained development of the rich nations and their
        interests are regarded as complementary and compatible, not conflicting and irreconcilable. And yet we may be
        nearing that philosophical bridge.
      </div>
<div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Mahbub ul Haq, 1975
      </div>
</div>
<div class="quotes">
<div class="text_noindent">
        The world economic system of the last three decades has ceased to work effectively. We all believe it needs
        urgent and major reforms and restructuring.
      </div>
<div class="attrib-text_right">
        -- Willy Brandt, 1979(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0274" id="bck_fn0274">1</a>)
      </div>
</div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Substantive north-south debate over how to restructure the international economic order could begin only after
      the kind of turning point ul Haq expected in 1975. Only then would both north and south worry about convincing
      the other side, yet be interested enough in agreement to remain open to being convinced themselves. That is the
      attitude needed in any substantive debate.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0275" id="bck_fn0275">2</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The development of both northern and southern views after 1974 should show if the turning point has been reached.
      Parties in a substantive political debate change their views in response to each other's concerns. If ul Haq
      is right, sometime after 1974 we would expect to see changes in the NIEO ideology resulting from both the
      south's serious consideration of the north's views and <a id="page_126"></a>the south<sup class="item2">'</sup>s responses to the north's serious consideration of its own views.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      To use David Apter's ideas about mobilizing ideologies, ul Haq's turning point would occur when the north
      recognized that the south would have to be involved in order for global economic regimes to be reformed in the
      way the north itself wanted. The north's acceptance of the south as a partner would give the south reason to
      reevaluate its own views.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In fact, few north-south disagreements have disappeared since 1974. Little substantive, intergovernmental debate
      on north-south matters has occurred. Yet the south's ideology has changed, if only a little, in response to
      northern concerns.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Was ul Haq wrong, then, when he said that a turning point was about to occur in 1975? Would it be wrong to apply
      Apter's theory and say that a fifth and final period in the development of the south's ideology began in
      1975 because the north crossed ul Haq's philosophical bridge and started to consider the third world
      necessary partners in world development?
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Not completely. A new degree of mutual understanding between north and south appeared in 1975, and it continues,
      even if agreement remains far away. The south's views became the agenda for all multilateral discussion of
      north-south relations, and substantive north-south debate began to occur, even if rarely in intergovernmental
      forums.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Few governments thought such debate was important. After 1974 northern European states simply adopted much of the
      NIEO ideology as their own; little remained for them to convince the south of, or for the south to convince them
      of. The Warsaw Pact states and France defined themselves as in agreement with the south and had little interest
      in substantive debate that would show how different the third world's position and theirs really were. The
      United States and the important northern states that tend to follow the U.S. lead -- West Germany, Britain, and
      Japan -- stepped in and out of the north-south dialogue. Sometimes they supported rapid resolution of outstanding
      north-south conflicts. Sometimes they did not. At no time did they support substantive political debate on
      north-south issues. American policy makers held that on fundamentals northern and southern views were
      incompatible. The most powerful northern states only wanted to exchange concessions with the south; they did not
      want to debate until both north and south had a single view of their common interests.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0276" id="bck_fn0276">3</a>) Futhermore, the south never pushed for substantive debate, although the Group
      of 77's political analysis shifted more and more in that direction.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nonetheless, some substantive north-south debate has taken place since 1974, and, as a result, the LDCs have
      changed some of their views. Yet northern governments <a id="page_127"></a>have rarely been direct sources of
      those changes. Instead, nongovernmental leaders have. Northern European officials were not the only ones to cross
      ul Haq<sup class="item2">'</sup>s philosophical bridge. After 1974 many northern opinion leaders outside
      government, people like Willy Brandt, began to push for resolution of the north-south conflict. In the process
      they adopted some new order views and began to debate others. In response, the south increased its consideration
      of what northerners wanted international economic regimes to accomplish. In addition, the south adopted much of
      its new political analysis, its analysis of how to make the NIEO a reality, directly from the nongovernmental
      organizations through which northern opinion leaders expressed their support of some southern goals.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      To illustrate these changes, this chapter is divided into four parts. The first section is a narrative of the
      north-south intergovernmental dialogue from 1975 through 1982. The second part discusses those northern goals
      that the NIEO ideology began to include after 1974. The third section looks at the policy proposals that the
      south has dropped since 1974. The final section discusses the experiments in tactics the LDCs have employed and
      illustrates why the south may decide that substantive intergovernmental debate is needed.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0030"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0030">The North-South Dialogue Since
    1974</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nineteen seventy-four was the year of NIEO demands. The Declaration and Programme of Action passed by the General
      Assembly's Sixth Special Session and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, adopted by the
      General Assembly in its regular fall session, contained nothing more or less than the south<sup class="item2">'</sup>s position. Adoption of those resolutions involved little attempt to debate, or even to
      consider, alternative views.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Within two months after the adoption of the charter the most high-profile parts of the north-south dialogue had
      drastically changed. In February at Lome, the capital of Togo, the European Community and a group of third world
      nations from all southern regions except Latin America agreed upon a long-negotiated treaty. It provided European
      development financing and financing for third world trade income shortfalls while taking into account European
      needs for assured access to third world raw materials and markets. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0277" id="bck_fn0277">4</a>) A few months later twenty-two nations began to meet in what was called the
      "Conference on International Economic Cooperation" (CIEC) in Paris. The conference's agenda
      included oil and the related resource issues that the north had thought would be on the agenda of the Sixth
      Special Session. The north insisted that participation in the CIEC be limited in order to assure it did not
      become a repeat of the 1974 <a id="page_128"></a>General Assembly sessions. At the same time the British
      Commonwealth met and approved a detailed, constructive analysis of the north-south problems that really
      represented a consensus of both its wealthy and poor members. Nineteen seventy-five also saw a cooperative
      meeting of UNID0(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0278" id="bck_fn0278">5</a>) and another United Nations special
      session called for the month before the beginning of the U.N.'s regular fall meetings.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The first four speeches to the General Assembly's Seventh Special Session exemplify the whole session and the
      rest of the north-south dialogue since then. Delegates were more cooperative than in 1974, but suggested little
      prospect for substantive north-south agreement. Despite many professions of sympathy by north to south and south
      to north, a great deal of misunderstanding remained.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Brazil spoke first. On most topics, the Brazilian delegate said, he was offering the Group of 77's opinion.
      He held two, somewhat contradictory, views of the prospects for the north-south dialogue: Because most northern
      states still had no national interest in the development of the south, realism suggested that the prospects for
      the north-south dialogue were dim. Yet, a bargain could be struck between north and south in which the north
      would gain a right to secure supplies of southern raw materials — that is, no more OPEC surprises — in exchange
      for accepting southern principles.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0279" id="bck_fn0279">6</a>) The proposed
      bargain actually contradicted those principles since they included the sovereign right of states to control their
      own natural resources. Perhaps Brazil was proposing to give up that fundamental right in order to get northern
      agreement on other southern principles. Or perhaps it expected the north to agree to some statement of third
      world principles before the LDCs agreed to some treaty giving the north assured access; at that point the south
      could turn right around and say that agreeing to such a treaty would violate the principles the north had just
      affirmed. The Brazilian speech suggested that any hope the south had for a north-south settlement was misguided.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Daniel Patrick Moynihan followed the Brazilian, reading a message prepared for U.S. Secretary of State Henry
      Kissinger, who had decided to continue his shuttle diplomacy in the Middle East rather than attend the
      conference. Nonetheless, the fact that Kissinger had even momentarily thought about attending the meeting
      represented a major shift in U.S. policy, a shift apparent throughout the speech Moynihan read. The speech
      announced the reversal of the general U.S. opposition to commodity agreements and proposed a number of major new
      U.S. aid initiatives.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0280" id="bck_fn0280">7</a>) These involved improving third
      world agriculture, something no third world state opposed, yet something that was hardly an NIEO priority given
      the long-standing southern focus on <a id="page_129"></a>industrialization. Nonetheless, even though the
      Kissinger speech concentrated on things that were somewhat beside the main point of the NIEO program, the speech
      did represent a major shift in U.S. policy toward the third world position. Southern states recognized that shift
      throughout the conference and since.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Italy, representing the European Community, spoke after the United States. Self-satisfied, the Italian delgate
      praised the Lome agreements and suggested that the European Community had long been in the forefront of developed
      country efforts on behalf of the third world.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0281" id="bck_fn0281">8</a>) Later
      in the conference European Community members received some confirmation of their view of themselves. Tunisia
      singled out France as the only major DMC that really pushed for third world industrialization,(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0282" id="bck_fn0282">9</a>) and Yugoslavia praised the British government's cooperative policy
      toward the NIEO.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0283" id="bck_fn0283">10</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Finally Norway, not a European Community member but one of the northern European countries that have always been
      sympathetic to the south, took the podium. The Norwegian spoke more briefly than the others, but much more
      directly about what developed countries had to do if they supported the NIEO. Norway recognized that such an
      order would mean industrialization and diversification of third world economies, which, in turn, would mean the
      end of some industries in the north. In order that no one in Norway would have to suffer from the
      government's policy of encouraging the NIEO, the Norwegian government had adopted adjustment assistance
      policies, becoming one of the earliest of the few governments that compensate workers whose industrial jobs are
      lost to competition from poorer nations abroad.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0284" id="bck_fn0284">11</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In ul Haq<sup class="item2">'</sup>s terms, the Norwegian statement demonstrated that Norway had crossed the
      philosophical bridge. The Norwegian government recognized that for its own economy to advance the economies of
      third world nations had to advance as well, and it even based its domestic economic policy on that assumption.
      Most Norwegians shared their government's view of how their development and that of third world are linked.
      For them economic development was more than growth. By 1975, Norwegians, and other northern Europeans, unlike
      most people from DMCs, tended to agree when pollsters ask if the wealth of people in developed countries is
      somehow diminished by the poverty of people in other parts of the world.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0285" id="bck_fn0285">12</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      It could be argued that the European Community's Lome policy represented a similar crossing of the
      philosophical bridge. At the very least, European Community members wanted to secure markets and sources of raw
      materials in the third world and would encourage third world development in order to do so.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      It could not be argued that the same concerns motivated the American change of heart evident at the <a id="page_130"></a>Seventh Special Session. That in no way implies that Kissinger's speech was not significant or
      sincere. But as Catherine Gwin argues, the main reason the U.S. changed its policy toward the NIEO was because
      its previous policy of trying to divide the south, pitting the poorest nations against the oil states, simply had
      not worked. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0286" id="bck_fn0286">13</a>) The policy failed both because the
      third world took a united stand and because the U.S. never really decided whether it wanted to ally with the
      poorer states against OPEC or with OPEC against the NIEO demands. Kissinger recognized that a more cooperative
      strategy for achieving U.S. interests was essential. U.S. interests involved secure supplies of oil for itself
      and its wealthy allies, but they did not include third world development. If anything, the United States was
      interested in limiting its material commitment to southern development in 1975. Recession following a period of
      high inflation made the U.S. government cautious about new financial commitments. Rather than saying that third
      world development was essential for U.S. development, Kissinger's speech said that U.S. growth was essential
      for third world growth. The first thing he thought the developed countries should do to help the third world was
      to get their own economies in order.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0287" id="bck_fn0287">14</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Since 1975, inflation and recession, along with the threat of inflation and recession, have dominated the
      developed economies unlike in any decade since the twenties and the thirties. Consequently, the Americans have
      constantly reiterated their view that the best thing northern governments could do for the third world is to
      establish stable continuous growth in their own, northern economies. Third world spokesmen have always said that
      this argument misses the point of the third world's NIEO demands.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0288" id="bck_fn0288">15</a>) Most recently the UNCTAD Secretariat's preparatory document for the 1983 UNCTAD
      VI meeting argued that recovery of the world economy required deliberate policies to encourage recovery in the
      developing nations.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0289" id="bck_fn0289">16</a>) Nonetheless, many northern
      governments and even many U.N. officials affirm what has been the U.S. position since 1975, that southern
      economies depend on northern economies but not vice versa.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Only one year after the Seventh Special Session the U.N. Secretariat reported to the General Assembly that the
      greatest hope for third world development that could be found in the events of 1976 was the recovery in developed
      nations. Nonetheless, the Secretariat made a point of saying that its interest in northern recovery should not be
      misconstrued as affirming the "drop-by-drop" theory of development. The north should do more to aid the
      third world than the little bit it could do after solving all northern economic problems.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0290" id="bck_fn0290">17</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The Secretariat's views should be read as saying <a id="page_131"></a>that very little happened in 1976 to
      make third world governments hopeful. Despite the change in northern tone, the Seventh Special Session resulted
      in no substantive agreements. 1976's fourth session of UNCTAD resulted in nothing but agreement that some
      issues surrounding a proposed integrated program of commodity pricing agreements, to be funded by a common fund
      for buffer stocks, should be discussed later. Some northern governments wanted them discussed only at the CIEC,
      which continued to languish in Paris without agreement. The best that the Group of 77 could say about the UNCTAD
      IV meeting was that in response to its substantive failure members of the group had agreed to coordinate their
      own efforts even more.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0291" id="bck_fn0291">18</a>) For example, from 1977 onward
      the foreign ministries of each country in the group approved a united statement on current economic matters
      before each autumn's U.N. session.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0292" id="bck_fn0292">19</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The few portents of possible north-south agreement came from the actions of intergovernmental and nongovernmental
      organizations, not from government to government talks. At the fall U.N. session Jamaica's Don Mills spoke
      for many Group of 77 members when he praised a new attitude apparent in the World Bank.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0293" id="bck_fn0293">20</a>) While the bank had not responded to the General Assembly's 1974 demand
      that all specialized agencies develop action plans for the NIEO, it had significantly changed its policies since
      the beginning of the decade. Bank President Robert McNamara replaced his earlier insistence upon population
      control as a panacea for development with a more sophisticated understanding of the local and global structural
      constraints. The bank began to emphasize education and health programs designed to break local cycles of poverty.
      In addition the bank substantially increased low-interest aid through the IDA. The World Bank also began to
      support a policy initially championed in the U.N.'s specialized agencies by the International Labor
      Organization, using development policy to eliminate poverty around the world by focusing aid on "basic
      needs."
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The Group of 77's position on "basic needs" began and remained somewhat ambivalent. Too great a
      concentration of international effort on supporting basic needs would take emphasis away from the group's
      fundamental development goal, industrialization. In that way, basic needs programs supported by the north looked
      a lot like other northern efforts aimed at deflecting the north-south dialogue from what the LDCs felt was its
      proper course -- northern concerns with population control, resource limits to growth, agricultural development,
      and northern economic recovery. An Indian U.N. delegate in 1978, for example, affirmed the importance of
      fufilling basic needs but argued that concerns for social justice should not divert attention from the need to
      change the global economic system.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0294" id="bck_fn0294">21</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
<a id="page_132"></a>On the other hand, "basic needs" development began as something of a third world
      idea. The International Labor Organization and the World Bank picked it up from a group of Latin American
      scholars who used it to criticize the philosophy underlying the original limits to growth studies of the early
      seventies. Rather than deriving policy conclusions based on assumptions about what would happen if present trends
      were allowed to continue without policy changes, the way the northern limits to growth scholars had, the Latin
      American group argued that goals for global development should be set first and any efforts at modeling the world
      system should discover how best to achieve those goals. The Latin American group simply chose eliminating poverty
      worldwide as one of the goals that the world system should strive to achieve.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0295" id="bck_fn0295">22</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Somewhat ironically, in 1976 the south began to take the advice of a much more direct successor of the original
      northern limits to growth study. The original limits to growth study had been financed by the Club of Rome, a
      primarily western European and North American group of business people, government officials, and academics
      interested in global problems. In response to the criticism generated by the first report the club commissioned
      more studies. The third, <span class="underline">Reshaping International Order</span>, appeared in 1976 and
      argued for most of the third world's NIEO proposals as well as for proposals to deal with environmental
      limits to growth and global security problems.(23 ) Partially in response to this Club of Rome report's
      recommendations, Peru proposed adding to the NIEO program the demand that nations move toward disarmament and
      that the money saved by reduced military budgets be directed to development.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0296" id="bck_fn0296">24</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The report had further effects on the LDCs' position. The report outlined both a long term plan for achieving
      the new order as well as plans for immediate change. The long term plan specified the time needed to enact the
      major changes it envisioned much more carefully than the 1974 NIEO plans had, making it clear that a completely
      transformed international order was not really feasible for a generation, even with constant effort. At the
      beginning of the 1976 General Assembly debate on economic matters the Secretariat reiterated the same time frame,
      arguing that subsequent debate should consider the NIEO as something to be achieved between then and the end of
      the century.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0297" id="bck_fn0297">25</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Ideas found in the Club of Rome report had an even more significant effect on the south's views the next
      year. Again it was the Peruvians who brought the views into the intergovernmental debate. Nineteen sevety-seven
      was a year of great disappointment for the south. CIEC ended without substantive agreement on the third world
      program. Contradicting the north's explanation of the failure of the 1974 General Assembly meetings as the
      result of having too many nations involved, the south <a id="page_133"></a>explained the failure of CIEC as a
      result of having so few states represented. Mexico led off the fall General Assembly debate by saying that the
      assembly's major concern in 1977 should be to prevent such unrepresentative meetings from taking place
      again.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0298" id="bck_fn0298">26</a>) Peru followed up with a much more detailed
      discussion of the CIEC, ending with the proposal that even if specific NIEO negotiations were to be conducted by
      small groups of states, all those negotiations should be carried out within a framework previously negotiated by
      all nations.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0299" id="bck_fn0299">27</a>) This proposed structure of negotiations
      was almost identical to the one proposed by the Club of Rome.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Other LDCs immediately adopted the Peruvian position. Brazil had the Peruvian speech reprinted and distributed
      widely during the General Assembly meeting.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0300" id="bck_fn0300">28</a>) The
      Group of 77 has maintained the Peruvian view of how north-south negotiations should be conducted ever since.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The original Peruvian speech noted that the one really positive thing that came out of the CIEC discussion was
      something that should come out of any substantive political debate, a real exchange of ideas. The Peruvian
      delegate felt that northern governments, especially the then new Carter administration in the U.S., had learned
      something about the south's views and had been convinced by some of them.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0301" id="bck_fn0301">29</a>) Unfortunately, he still noted a great deal of the northern attitude that, according
      to Gwin, had motivated the original American change of heart toward the NIEO in 1975. Some northern states still
      considered the purpose of north-south negotiations to be "palliative or philanthropic."(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0302" id="bck_fn0302">30</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The same debate illustrated much continuity in the American attitude. As evidence of the seriousness with which
      Carter took the U.N. debate, as U.S. representative he had sent Richard Cooper, a highly respected economist,
      probably the most qualified representative the U.S. had ever sent to U.N. economic meetings. Cooper reiterated
      the American view that the most important thing the U.S. could do for southern development was to keep its own
      economic house in order. When he commented on additional policies, he only emphasized things like basic needs
      that the south felt were somewhat beside the main point. He did not invite the south to be involved in
      transforming international economic regimes.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0303" id="bck_fn0303">31</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Cooper's attitude represented something of the "Trilateral" position that characterized the early
      Carter administration. European, North American, and Japanese government officials, corporate leaders, and policy
      makers created the Trilateral Commission as a response to the economic problems of the early seventies.
      Trilateral members emphasized reestablishing the postwar free trade system on a stronger footing.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0304" id="bck_fn0304">32</a>) Trilateral reports proposed that the consensus needed to
      rebuild global economic regimes should be built in two parts, with the <a id="page_134"></a>"Trilateral
      countries," the United States, Japan, and the European Community (or at least its leading member, West
      Germany) agreeing among themselves and then dictating to, or "inviting the consensus of," the rest of
      the world. A 1977 report even proposed this as the way to gain global consensus on means to solve third world
      development problems.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0305" id="bck_fn0305">33</a>) President Carter built his
      administration around fellow Trilateral members. Consequently, despite the increasing sympathy with the south
      that Peru had noted, the U.S. remained opposed to the Group of 77's strategy for negotiating a new order.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The north-south dialogue changed little throughout the rest of the Carter years. The General Assembly responded
      to the Peruvian proposal to have framework negotiations involving all states by having "committee of the
      whole" meetings on economic matters at each fall session. In 1979 Jamaica's Don Mills pointed out that
      such meetings had accomplished nothing.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0306" id="bck_fn0306">34</a>) No one
      disagreed. The UNCTAD V meeting in 1979 resulted in little further progress on the integrated commodity program.
      (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0307" id="bck_fn0307">35</a>) A United Nations Conference on Science and
      Technology for Development met in September 1979, but achieved no substantive agreement on technology transfer.
      An uneventful meeting of UNIDO took place in 1980. Finally, the General Assembly met in another special session
      on the NIEO in 1980. The meeting did nothing more than prior meetings of the committee of the whole. The U.N.
      came up with a plan for the 1980s as a development decade, but that plan contained no framework treaty for NIEO
      negotiations.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The only thing that made the south hopeful at the 1980 special session was a speech by United States Secretary of
      State Muskie. Muskie referred to his government's recently completed <span class="underline">Global 2000
      Report</span>, which outlined reasons why U.S. development would become increasingly dependent on growth in other
      parts of the world. The report noted the disarray of the postwar economic system and the need for reform.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0308" id="bck_fn0308">36</a>) Muskie's speech affirmed an American move away from
      Trilateralism that had been developing for some time. In May 1979 American security advisor Brzezinski had spoken
      of ". . . widening our primary relationships to encompass countries in Latin America, Africa, and
      Asia," and of developing a new "genuinely global" American foreign policy.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0309" id="bck_fn0309">37</a>) Muskie's speech a year later implied that the U.S. had crossed the
      philosophical bridge and recognized the south as partners in development who would have to be part of the initial
      consensus on any restructured international economic order.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nevertheless, the U.S. remained opposed to the ways in which the south proposed negotiating the NIEO, even when
      those proposed means had significant northern support. The Carter administration attitude toward a north-south
      summit on development exemplified that <a id="page_135"></a>attitude.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The idea for such a summit came out of the first report of the Brandt Commission, (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0310" id="bck_fn0310">38</a>) another nongovernmental group created in the seventies. This independent
      commission on development topics organized had been organized by Willy Brandt, former German prime minister and
      head of the world social democratic movement. The commission's aim was to produce a sort of ten year update
      of the Pearson Commission report. Brandt, therefore, chose his commissioners from policy makers and business
      people around the world, especially those from the north. Overall, the Brandt commissioners began with more
      conservative leanings than the members of the Pearson Commission. The Brandt Commission included Edward Heath,
      former head of the British Conservative Party, and Peter Peterson, Nixon's Commerce Secretary, both more
      conservative figures than the British and American politicians chosen by Pearson. Nonetheless, in comparison to
      the Pearson Commission's conclusions, the Brandt Commission's were more radical and more compatible with
      the NIEO ideology.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The Brandt Commission proposed to spark languishing north-south negotiations by a summit meeting of a limited
      number of heads of government from both developed and developing countries who would discuss and debate
      north-south matters. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0311" id="bck_fn0311">39</a>) The press throughout the north
      quickly backed the 1980 Brandt summit proposal. But the U.S. government, involved in a presidential election and
      a foreign affairs crisis in Iran, did not.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Immediately after the 1980 U.S. presidential election, Mexico's president, Lopez Portillo, who along with
      Austrian socialist leader, Prime Minister Bruno Kreisky, had agreed to host the Brandt summit, visited with the
      new American president-elect. To the surprise of many in the south who knew Reagan as the man who rejected the
      <span class="underline">Global_2000 Report</span> out of hand and had never expressed the slightest belief that
      the LDCs were essential to the development of the north, Portillo convinced the new U.S. president to attend the
      summit held at Cancun, a Mexican resort.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      As the Mexican Foreign Ministry's report of the Cancun summit makes clear, the vast majority of those
      represented — third world nations along with Austria, Canada, and Sweden — spent their time trying to convince
      the representatives of three nations — Reagan, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, and West German Foreign
      Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher — to support an updated version of the Peruvian proposal of a way to negotiate a
      new order.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0312" id="bck_fn0312">40</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The new proposal called for a three phase series of "global negotiations." Negotiations would begin
      with establishing a framework within the General Assembly. Then bargaining over reforms of specific parts of the
      U.N. system would be conducted within the agency that <a id="page_136"></a>would be most affected — e.g.,
      development finance negotiations in the World Bank, trade negotiations under the auspices of the GATT and UNCTAD.
      Finally, the whole package of new order agreements would be discussed again by the General Assembly, which would
      iron out disagreements among proposed reforms and ratify the entire package.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Reagan's government found the proposal for global negotiations particularly problematic, and not just because
      it was to begin with the sort of huge General Assembly meeting that the U.S. had always considered pointless. The
      proposal had first been made by Algeria in 1979 after the failure of the General Assembly committee of the whole.
      Algeria made the proposal at the nonaligned summit in Havana, a meeting that had been particularly hostile to the
      U.S. (In fact, Reagan made it a condition of his acceptance of the Cancun invitation that titular nonaligned
      leader, Fidel Castro, not be included.) The nonaligned proposal for global negotiations had gone to the General
      Assembly. For over a year informal negotiations had continued in New York about how such negotiations should be
      conducted. But one of the first things the new Reagan U.N. representatives did was to withdraw from those
      discussions. They feared that global negotiations could go on for years and result in a treaty similar to the Law
      of the Sea Treaty being negotiated then. The Reagan government felt it could not support that treaty but feared
      not signing it after the U.S. had taken part in negotiations for so long.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0313" id="bck_fn0313">41</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Because of the Reagan administration's hesitancy, Cancun ended without substantive agreement on starting
      global negotiations. Nonetheless, the Mexican Foreign Ministry concluded that the Cancun summit was a success
      simply because it facilitated agreement on global negotiations. All states, including the U.S. and its two close
      allies, affirmed the need for those negotiations and accepted the General Assembly as their first venue and the
      specialized agencies as their second.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0314" id="bck_fn0314">42</a>) The U.S.
      rejoined the informal meetings in New York aimed at resolving further differences.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Despite the Cancun agreement, at the end of 1982 the north-south dialogue had not advanced· Law of the Sea
      negotiations ended in April with the U.S. rejecting the pro-third world treaty and the U.S.'s major northern
      allies abstaining. Global negotiations remained stymied because of a disagreement that Britain, West Germany, and
      the U.S. had with the other members of the General Assembly. Those three states demanded that the assembly not be
      empowered to change any agreements reached in the specialized agencies. The third round of global negotiations
      would only be able to ratify those agreements when global negotiations return to the assembly in their final
      stage.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0315" id="bck_fn0315">43</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The stalemate over global negotiations assured that <a id="page_137"></a>the south's views did not change in
      1982. Third world speeches during the autumn General Assembly debate that year contained only one thing new: Even
      while reiterating calls for global negotiations to transform the global economic order, for the first time in
      eight years southern officials rarely used the phrase "New International Economic Order."
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0031"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0031">The Debate and Nieo Goals</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      No matter how southern rhetoric has changed, third world NIEO goals have changed no more after 1974 than they did
      in the thirty years before. After 1974 the south adopted new goals suggested by its northern supporters only when
      those goals could be made subordinant to the third world primary goal, industrialization. The south rejected
      attempts by its northern supporters to make "fulfilling basic needs" as important as industrialization,
      but in the process the LDCs added something similar as a secondary goal. The third world completely rejected an
      attempt by some of its northern nongovernmental supporters to oppose further industrialization. And the LDCs did
      nothing to expand their NIEO goals to include those that DMC governments think are central to any international
      economic system.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The goals the LDCs adopted from their northern European allies include those in the Peruvian proposal for global
      disarmament to finance development. This proposal had been made at the first UNCTAD in 1964 and then ignored by
      the south for more than ten years. Disarmament had long been a distant goal of some of the south's strongest
      northern supporters, including Sweden.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0316" id="bck_fn0316">44</a>) As long as
      disarmament was tied to development, LDCs were happy to create a U.N. majority in favor of a special General
      Assembly session on the topic. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0317" id="bck_fn0317">45</a>) An element of
      opportunism contributed to the south's adoption of this goal. The most consistent champions of Peru's
      disarmament for development proposal have not been LDC governments? they have been nongovernmental commissions
      like Willy Brandt's and the disarmament commission later formed by Brandt Commission member, Swedish Prime
      Minister Olof Palme. In fact, Brandt's report points out that since 1974 most third world nations have been
      accelerating arms purchases even more than most developed nations.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0318" id="bck_fn0318">46</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Another new third world goal adopted in a similar way began with a proposal made by Austrian Prime Minister
      Kreisky. Kreisky suggested a Marshall-like plan for infrastructure development in Africa in order to stimulate
      European economies·(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0319" id="bck_fn0319">47</a>) Third world officials extended
      his idea to a call for a new Marshall Plan for the entire third world, one that would stimulate economies
      throughout the north. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0320" id="bck_fn0320">48</a>) This was one of the <a id="page_138"></a>rare cases when the LDCs expressed concern with northern growth.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The only other example concerns trade and protectionism among northern countries. Just as northern concern about
      the slow and uneven recoveries after each of the recessions since 1974 motivated Kreisky's proposal, the same
      concern made many northern governments worry about protectionism that might follow if the rapid cycles of
      recession and weak recovery continued. The south adopted this concern with maintaining the liberal trade system
      among developed states. But the general issue of northern protectionism became important to the south only when
      attached to the older NIEO issue of unfair tariffs on LDC goods.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In 1979 the Tokyo Round of GATT negotiations ended with agreements on significant tariff and nontariff barriers
      to trade among DMCs. Fears of mounting protectionism and continuing recession, which had been voiced by some
      northern scholars for almost a decade, eased. The <span class="underline">New York Times</span> even cautiously
      suggested that the postwar economic system had survived its greatest trial intact. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0321" id="bck_fn0321">49</a>) Nonetheless, all the LDCs in GATT except Argentina boycotted the trade pact
      ceremonies protesting that duties on exports from LDCs had been reduced significantly less than those on DMC
      exports. Moreover, DMCs continued to protect national industries with which the LDCs could best compete.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0322" id="bck_fn0322">50</a>) At the fifth UNCTAD meeting the following month the DMCs
      insisted that they had done what they could for the LDCs under GATT rules. They did not want to violate those
      rules because, as European Community delegate Sir Roy Denman put it, without the pact the west would have to
      return to ". . . the economic blizzards of the 1930s, the hunger, fear, and political extremism experienced
      then."(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0323" id="bck_fn0323">51</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The DMCs refused to reopen tariff negotiations, and the LDCs then adopted northern rhetoric about the global
      results of protectionism in order to argue more convincingly for greater access to developed markets.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0324" id="bck_fn0324">52</a>) Third world attacks on protectionism among northern states
      as well as on northern protection against LDC goods continue to appear, even if they appear somewhat
      uncomfortably alongside third world proposals for international approval of development-oriented national
      restrictions on trade.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The south reacted more consistently and vigorously to northern concerns with development for "basic
      needs," concerns that became so important after 1974. Those concerns commanded greater attention in the
      south because many northern democratic socialists and liberals who support the third world consider development
      for basic needs to be fundamental.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0325" id="bck_fn0325">53</a>) Northern concern
      with basic needs can be traced back to sixties' critiques of aid, including the Pearson Commission report,
      which emphasized that the bulk of foreign aid given for humanitarian <a id="page_139"></a>purposes never improved
      the lives of the world's poor. It was used for the political and economic aggrandizement of particular third
      world elites, often the real goal of northern donors.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0326" id="bck_fn0326">54</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Despite the fact that early suggestions for basic needs development came from northerners sympathetic to the
      south and even from southern scholars, many LDC leaders saw such strategies as attacks on their ideas. Third
      world officials viewed basic needs strategies supported by the U.S. government under Carter and by the World Bank
      as northern attempts to change the focus of global debate by proposing that domestic equity be a condition for
      receiving further aid. If northern officials had been successful, so the argument goes, they would have escaped
      responsibilities to provide aid. That was the real aim of "basic needs" proposals. Don Mills outlines
      these objections and concludes:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      There is a great need, therefore, for the concept of basic needs to be brought into a realistic relationship with
      the facts of political and economic organization and development so that its intrinsic value can be preserved
      without it becoming a philosophy of development, or the ultimate aim of the development process.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0327" id="bck_fn0327">55</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Even if the basic needs notion has been used by some northern governments as a simplistic justification for
      inaction, the idea underlying it has always been part of the position of most northerners who sympathize with the
      south and are interested in something more than castigating third world elites. Gunnar Myrdal's economic
      theories, for example, demand increasing economic equality throughout the world, well beyond assuring that each
      person's basic economic needs are met, as a goal of economic development and as a means for both providing
      incentives to save and assuring the ability to produce. Nonetheless, Myrdal argues that the structural
      constraints in many developing states make it impossible for them to institute programs encouraging domestic
      economic equality until greater national wealth has been created.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0328" id="bck_fn0328">56</a>) Likewise, the intuitive notion of international economic justice expressed by La
      Guardia in the forties rested upon globally meeting basic human economic needs, but La Guardia felt it was wrong
      to blame governments for saying that other economic goals were more important. Each nation's primary economic
      development goals would probably be unique. Nonetheless, meeting basic economic needs was, for La Guardia, a
      global responsibility to achieve a goal that was the same everywhere. Meeting basic economic needs would allow
      nations to more easily pursue their unique economic development.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The social democratic perspective exemplified by <a id="page_140"></a>Myrdal's ideas and the type of
      liberalism La Guardia expressed can bridge the gap between the Group of 77 and those northerners who ignore
      southern demands. In fact, northern European states have become go-betweens in the north-south conflict in part
      because of their insistence that the NIEO be amended to meet basic economic needs.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0329" id="bck_fn0329">57</a>) Likewise, private individuals who share such perspectives have been able to do
      the most to organize support for the NIEO in developed countries, in part because they have demonstrated their
      own support for meeting basic needs development. Michael Harrington, the head of the American democratic
      socialists, makes this explicit in his <span class="underline">The Vast Majority</span>, published in 1977. He
      argues the merits of the south's position and appeals to the charitable "best side" of the American
      people, their sympathy with the poor, the attitudes which motivated the development of basic needs strategies in
      the first place.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0330" id="bck_fn0330">58</a>) The popularity in the north of even
      the Brandt Commission's report, which deliberately avoids appeals to charity, certainly comes in part from
      its concern with the plight of the world's poorest people rather than with the plight of the governments of
      the world's poorest nations.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The importance of basic needs notions to the south's strongest northern allies assured that the third world,
      itself, would adopt something akin to this goal. Beginning with the General Assembly's Declaration on Social
      Progress and Development in 1969, NIEO documents describe economic justice for individuals as a defining
      characteristic of development. After the Sixth Special Session in 1974, third world spokesmen began to link
      economic justice for individuals more directly to the central NIEO goal of industrialization. For example, the
      Latin American industrialization conferences
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      . . . stressed that domestic industrialization policies must take into account the need for an adequate
      distribution of income to make possible the expansion of domestic markets. In that way industrial growth can be
      conducive to the attainment of the objective of raising the standard of living and eliminating
      unemployment.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0331" id="bck_fn0331">59</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_noindent">
      The more flowery language of the UNIDO conference in 1975 put the point this way:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      All states should recognize that, in any industrial development process, social justice must be the irreplaceable
      means, in the spiritual, economic, and social aspects, to obtain the objective of a just society pervaded by a
      spirit of solidarity.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0332" id="bck_fn0332">60</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_noindent">
      The point is to advocate justice for individuals as a secondary goal, a means to achieving the more significant
      <a id="page_141"></a>NIEO goals of industrialization and national unity.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This statement illustrates one way third world NIEO advocates propose to resolve their debate with their northern
      supporters over basic needs policies. Meeting basic needs will become a necessary, but secondary, new order goal.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Yet the debate remains open. The third world alliance could decide to treat domestic economic justice the same
      way it threats population control, as one possible, but not necessary, means to achieve more important
      development goals, a means that individual third world governments should be free to choose or not to choose.
      Meeting basic needs could hardly be a consistent part of the third world ideology as long as many LDCs do little
      to meet them, as long as some southern leaders can be forced by the facts to make statements like the one Raul
      Prebisch made at UNCTAD V in 1979 when he concluded that:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      . . . callous elites in the developing countries were ruining the chances of the people to raise living standards
      through trade. They had turned their countries into "privileged consumption societies."(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0333" id="bck_fn0333">61</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Prebisch proposed that national development programs be more strictly monitored by international agencies to
      assure that public welfare is improved, a view perfectly consistent with proposals like those of the Brandt
      Commission and the 1976 Club of Rome study. Southern governments have not adopted Prebisch's view on this
      subject as their own. While the debate over basic needs may have made meeting them an NIEO goal, the new order
      ideology still considers it up to national governments to decide whether or not the goal has been achieved.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The late-seventies nongovernmental debate on a reformed international economic order brought up one other goal
      that the south more firmly rejected. In the early seventies, under the influence of limits to growth ideas,
      praise of industrialization waned in the developed nations. This had an effect on the third world. Almost any LDC
      contains a small class of people who will find anti-industrialism appealing. V. S. Naipaul, a novelist who is far
      from sympathetic to the goals of third world governments, nonetheless shows how weak an anti-industrial
      philosophy will be in a nation like India where the landed elite might look for the integrity of a dimly
      remembered preindustrial past. Such concerns can easily be directed by government policy into programs for
      "appropriate" or "intermediate" technologies, alongside but not replacing more traditional
      means of industrialization.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0334" id="bck_fn0334">62</a>) Nonetheless, in the
      seventies many northern sympathizers expressed hope that the south would have a future, if not without industry,
      at least free <a id="page_142"></a>from the horrors of industrialization that people in the north had had to
      suffer.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Despite this internal and external pressure southern governments never reversed their calls for
      industrialization. Rather, they responded to such ideas by emphasizing that industrialization had to be
      undertaken in ways appropriate to a nation's culture and to the physical environment. They reaffirmed their
      older concern with nurturing the cultural differences between nations and emphasized the new principle of
      preserving the environment which had come out of the north-south debate in the early seventies. But neither
      affirmation denied the goal of industrialization. By the end of the seventies, the anti-industrialism of northern
      NIEO sympathizers had waned as much as that of their southern allies. The debate led to agreement on the position
      embodied earlier in the Cocoyoc Declaration made by southern leaders and northern nongovernmental supporters.
      Both southern officials and their northern supporters affirmed that industrialization of the third world was
      essential and that the south should learn from the north's failure to protect the physical environment and
      cultural traditions when industrializing.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0335" id="bck_fn0335">63</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In summary, some people from the north did have an effect on the way southern leaders conceived of NIEO goals in
      the late seventies, and those changes in LDC views did result from substantive debate. Yet northern governments
      rarely debated and the changes in LDC goals that took place were minor. The south never focused on the goals that
      the most powerful northern governments addressed when they discussed reforming the international economic order.
      The south only changed its goals to accommodate some of the concerns expressed by northern supporters. But since
      the realm of disagreement between the south and its northern supporters, both in and outside of government, was
      so narrow, the substantive debate between those two groups could lead to little new. In the one case where
      northern supporters of the south insisted upon a goal substantially different than those supported by the Group
      of 77, the area of basic needs, the debate continues.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0032"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0032">The Debate and Nieo Policy
    Proposals</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      The debate continues over specific NIEO policy proposals as well. Nonetheless, some north-south agreement on
      controlling yet encouraging transnational investment, facilitating the transfer of technology, eliminating the
      brain drain, and redeploying northern industrial capacity to the third world has occurred since 1974. Agreement
      took place after substantial clarification but no substantive change in new order policy proposals. By the end of
      the seventies <a id="page_143"></a>international codes of conduct for TNCs and for the transfer of technology
      appeared imminent. The difference between the DMC view of the primacy of property rights and the LDC view of the
      primacy of national rights had been clarified. And a few northern nations had started to redeploy industry to the
      third world.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0336" id="bck_fn0336">64</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      A small UNCTAD commission concerned with the transfer of technology clarified the south's views on property.
      The first draft code on the transfer of technology proposed by Brazil in 1975 identified technology as part of
      the universal human heritage, thus claiming an LDC right to technology higher than the rights of property owners
      yet not associated with the rights of states per se. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0337" id="bck_fn0337">65</a>) Further clarification of this principle found in later UNCTAD versions of the
      proposed code illustrate a new order position that does not simply place national rights over property above
      owner's rights, but rather is concerned with having international law -- binding codes of conduct on
      technology and TNCs, not traditional international law — define the extent of proprietary rights under the
      assumption that some property, the resources of the ocean as well as human knowledge, is a common heritage of
      humankind. Other property belongs to individuals or groups, under the laws of some sovereign nation. To take into
      account the "primacy" of the national rights of people in developing countries, NIEO advocates want
      those countries to be given the fullest possible access to technologies whose transfer is not subject to private
      decision.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0338" id="bck_fn0338">66</a>) To put it in simpler language, national
      governments must give technical knowledge they own to other national governments under the notion of common
      heritage. Nonetheless, the proprietary rights of private owners of technology should continue to be protected for
      a fixed period of time by national governments and by international patents. The south wants the principle issue
      of technology transfer to be one of the duties of states to aid each other, not one of property rights.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Larger UNCTAD meetings also encouraged changes in the south's ideology. At UNCTAD IV in 1976 the LDCs renamed
      the brain drain the "reverse transfer of technology" to emphasize the similarity between the gain of
      technically skilled third world people by developed nations and the gain of technical know-how by third world
      states.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0339" id="bck_fn0339">67</a>) Specific policies for combating the brain
      drain and for redeploying developed industries were left to national governments. Thus, little substance has been
      added to the new order policy analysis of these issues.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The same is true of the NIEO analysis of techniques for facilitating the transfer of technology and encouraging
      yet controlling TNCs. The proposed codes of conduct for each continue to emphasize strengthening the bargaining
      power of LDCs. This would be accomplished by exchanging information more freely and by forbidding <a id="page_144"></a>investment policies which discriminate against certain groups of states.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0340" id="bck_fn0340">68</a>) These points do not bother most northern states, although the idea of binding
      international codes to assure compliance remains an issue for north-south debate.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The actual north-south debate since 1974 has had a more marked effect on the LDCs' analysis of policies that
      are meant to encourage industrialization less directly. In response to the debate, the south actually dropped
      some of its demands.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Of course, most of the NIEO policies for restructuring the financial and monetary systems proposed at the Sixth
      Special Session continue to be supported by the Group of 77. Many have also received northern support. Since
      1974, north and south have agreed on new aid targets. Nations with special development problems — the least
      developed, landlocked, and island states received greater attention, especially at UNCTAD IV, which agreed to
      long term measures favoring these states in trade, finance, technical assistance, shipping, and insurance.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0341" id="bck_fn0341">69</a>) At CIEC six individual donor nations and the European
      Community pledged one billion dollars to the LLDCs. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0342" id="bck_fn0342">70</a>)
      The donor nations also supported large replenishments of funds to IDA and to the regional development banks as
      well as sales of IMF gold reserves and some expansion of SDR liquidity designed to aid poorer nations.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0343" id="bck_fn0343">71</a>) Taken together, though, these changes in the aid and
      financial aspects of north-south relations represented only limited reforms.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nonetheless, the Group of 77 amended its most radical proposals for restructuring these systems in response to
      DMC receptiveness to less radical proposals. In 1975 many third world countries were calling for generalized debt
      relief — conversion of outstanding aid loans into grants retroactively. The UNCTAD Secretariat provided the
      analysis justifying a common response to the different debt problems experienced by different LDCs:
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      The present debt servicing difficulties of the developing countries are not the result of specific external
      circumstances peculiar to particular countries . . . The problem clearly has a more general dimension since it
      springs from maladjustments in the world economy and is beyond the ability of the developing countries to
      control.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0344" id="bck_fn0344">72</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_noindent">
      Prior to the late 1970s few of the developed countries and neither the World Bank nor the IMF expressed much
      sympathy for the long standing third world demands for general debt relief. In 1975 the prospects for generalized
      debt relief appeared bleak.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      They became brighter when financial leaders of the developed nations started to support debt relief. <a id="page_145"></a>Although they did not accept the NIEO argument that debt burdens were systemic problems affecting
      third world states, major private bankers and leaders of national banks in some DMCs felt that prospect of
      default by many third world debtors would destabilize an already shaky world financial situation. As summarized
      by the UMCTAD Secretariat in June 1977,
    </div>
<div class="quotes1">
      . . . in recent months several authorities have begun to accept the need for some form of official initiative,
      there being "growing recognition" that private intermediaries may not be able to manage the
      task.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0345" id="bck_fn0345">73</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In August 1977 CIEC approved guidelines for debt relief negotiations on a case by case rather than general
      basis.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0346" id="bck_fn0346">74</a>) With some widespread debt rescheduling a
      practical possibility after 1977, individual third world nations withdrew their support of general debt relief.
      Brazil, for example, highly dependent on private credit, realized that it could be jeopardized if the government
      waged an active campaign for generalized third world debt relief.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0347" id="bck_fn0347">75</a>) By mid-1979 British economist and observer of the third world debate Paul Streeten
      could conclude that the Group of 77 had dropped proposals for generalized debt relief in light of prospects for
      case by case relief.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0348" id="bck_fn0348">76</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Streeten may have spoken too soon. The continuing global economic crisis of the early eighties increased the
      pressure for debt relief. In 1983 the Brandt Commission issued its second report, giving significant northern
      support to global solutions to the third world debt crisis. (<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0349" id="bck_fn0349">77</a>) Later in 1983, at UNCTAD VI, the Group of 77 returned to its calls for generalized
      debt relief.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0350" id="bck_fn0350">78</a>) Nonetheless, both exclusion and
      readmission of this proposal to the south's ideology responded, in part, to northern initiatives in the
      north-south debate.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In a very different way, northern actions triggered the third world's deemphasis of another element of the
      NIEO financial package, the Link between new SDR allocations and aid to third world states. The utility of the
      SDR-Link proposal rests on the assumption that the IMF will periodically and predictably create new SDRs so that
      there will be a predictable source of new foreign exchange for the governments of poorer nations. Between 1972
      and 1979 no new SDRs were created. A date for new allocation, January 1978, even passed without IMF action.
      Nations with convertible currencies had doubted the need for new allocations. The floating exchange rate system
      established in response to the U.S. new economic policy of 1971 provided a means for creating new liquidity
      without new SDR allocations. Because the amount of each of the currencies exchanges in world money markets could
      be increased by the national decisions of central banks, <a id="page_146"></a>the potential role of the SDR had
      been reduced. That meant, as the UNCTAD Secretariat concluded in 1975, the Link was much less feasible.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0351" id="bck_fn0351">79</a>5
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      After 1974 the focus of third world concerns about monetary reform shifted to advocating a greater role for SDRs
      and to returning to the original Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0352" id="bck_fn0352">80</a>) By late 1978, when the Managing Director of the IMF was seeking a fifty percent
      increase in IMF quotas and a new allocation of SDRs, the LDC members of the fund had dropped their calls for the
      Link. Instead, they concentrated on convincing the fund to relax restrictions upon new LDC borrowing from
      expanded quotas. They wanted the fund to moderate its requirements affecting the internal and external pricing of
      LDC commodities and the value of LDC currencies.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0353" id="bck_fn0353">81</a>) In
      a similar distraction from the previous third world focus on the Link proposal, in 1976 the nonaligned states
      considered new proposals for a third world reserve currency, proposals which have never gone beyond the
      discussion stage.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0354" id="bck_fn0354">82</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      As they did with the financial policies they supported, NIEO advocates shifted the trade policies they emphasized
      in response to northern initiatives of the late seventies. The LDCs changed only the focus of their political
      action, not the substance of the proposals they supported. In 1976 with the passage of a comprehensive trade act
      in the United States, tariff preferences to the third world became almost universal.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0355" id="bck_fn0355">83</a>) Temporarily, until the conclusion of the next round of GATT negotiations in
      1979, this ceased to be the major trade issue for the LDCs. It was replaced by the Integrated Programme for
      Commodities (IPC), the system of buffer stocks to be purchased from a common international fund and then used to
      support prices of certain commodities. Despite the fact that DMCs consistently made concessions toward the third
      world on the IPC, no substantive agreement on new commodity pacts has been reached.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      A small group of UNCTAD permanent staff members created the IPC proposal· It reflected Keynes's suggestions
      for commodity price stabilization as well as the vaguer requirements for giving third world nations control over
      their external trade found in the 1974 NIEO documents. The invention of the IPC involved dropping one of the
      south<sup class="item2">'</sup>s most radical demands of 1974. Even the earliest versions of the IPC included
      no proposals for indexing the prices of third world commodities to the prices of DMC goods. Not only did most
      DMCs find indexing objectionable, the UNCTAD staff could think of no way to make it work in practice.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0356" id="bck_fn0356">84</a>) Of course in 1974 the IPC looked only slightly more
      feasible than indexing. Almost every element of the IPC was anathema to those northern states that acted upon
      free trade ideologies.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      DMC positions moderated. In 1975 the U.S. indicated its willingness to negotiate new commodity agreements. In
      <a id="page_147"></a>1977 the new Carter administration accepted the idea of the Common Fund.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0357" id="bck_fn0357">85</a>) The Eastern European socialist states, the northern European states,
      Australia, New Zealand, and to a lesser extent Japan and other European Community members have supported the
      general notion of the IPC since 1975. While the developed nations supported the principles of the IPC at UNCTAD
      IV and V, disagreements continued over how the Common Fund should be administered, what commodities could be
      stabilized by the program, and whether or not some attempt should be made to increase commodity prices over the
      market trend. Robert Rothstein reports that the simple limitation of time available to the small group of UNCTAD
      staff members familiar with the IPC restricted the extent to which NIEO advocates could respond to the
      north's technical objections.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0358" id="bck_fn0358">86</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In addition, the LDCs tended to worry about their unity throughout the IPC negotiations, and therefore remained
      cautious about adopting new positions. They often failed to respond to northern initiatives.( <a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0359" id="bck_fn0359">87</a> ) Conceivably the reluctance of Group of 77 members to debate the
      technical problems of the IPC more vigorously reflected an unwillingness to give those LDCs most likely to
      benefit from the pact additional trade advantages so soon after many of the same states had received the benefits
      of the European Community's Lome Pact. That appeared to be what disturbed some states in the south, the
      wealthier nations of Latin America.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0360" id="bck_fn0360">88</a>) In any event,
      the issue of DMC tariff preferences, especially salient to Latin America, again became the center of the
      north-south trade debate before the IPC could be created. Despite international agreement on the outlines of the
      Common Fund in 1979, no new commodity agreements or agreements on other elements of the IPC have been reached.
      The north-south debate produced a partial agreement in principle without an active program.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0033"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0033">The Debate and the Group of 77's
    Political Analysis</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      Despite the lack of progress, and despite the increasingly radical scholarly analysis being produced by third
      world dependency theorists,(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0361" id="bck_fn0361">89</a>) no significant
      radicalization of the third world position took place between 1975 and 1983. The political analysis acted upon by
      LDCs in the late seventies involved no proposals for projecting third world power beyond the use of Group of 77
      unity in international organizations and the use of "commodity power" of individual developing states
      through stricter controls over foreign firms. Even if at the end of the decade the Saudi oil minister could still
      tell reporters that OPEC would refuse to stabilize energy prices until the DMCs began to be serious about the
      NIEO,(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0362" id="bck_fn0362">90</a>) OPEC states never pressured developed states
      to <a id="page_148"></a>accept the NIEO by cutting off oil.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Obviously, most LDCs consulted more than the NIEO ideology when they made foreign economic policy. OPEC states
      could not be convinced to sacrifice their interests as oil producers to the cause of the NIEO. Not only would
      revenues be cut by attempts to use the oil weapon — a major disadvantage to a few OPEC members like Nigeria --
      such action would also invite military retaliation against the oil producers.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In addition, in the late 1970s the positions of the DMCs encouraged continued moderation of third world political
      analysis. Even the most status quo oriented developed states had become more receptive to specific NIEO policies
      and to the general idea of a new order. They had not been convinced by the oil price increases. The more
      conservative DMCs only changed their opinions after months of the discussion that the oil price increases had
      begun.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Instead of advocating new means to extend third world power, NIEO sponsors concentrated upon proposing and
      advocating changes in the institutional structure of the U.N. system, redesigning the system to achieve new order
      goals. A comprehensive plan for restructuring the economic agencies, written for the Seventh Special Session in
      1975, became the basis for subsequent NIEO proposals. The report proposed that UNIDO be made a specialized agency
      with status equivalent to the World Bank and the IMF.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0363" id="bck_fn0363">91</a>) Otherwise, the overall structure of global economic institutions envisioned by NIEO
      advocates otherwise remained as postwar framers of the Bretton Woods system had suggested, including the creation
      of an ITO out of UNCTAD and GATT. The only Other NIEO institutional innovation would be to make the IMF a true
      global central bank.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0364" id="bck_fn0364">92</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The report on restructuring recommended that existing U.N. agencies adopt conciliation procedures when the NIEO
      is being negotiated.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0365" id="bck_fn0365">93</a> ) Such procedures, if
      universally adopted in the U.N. and its specialized agencies, would give the third world a new veto in some
      agencies including the World Bank, IMF, and Economic and Social Council, without going to the extreme of
      sanctioning majority rule of states. Nonetheless, neither the advantages of this compromise on rule making, nor
      its disadvantages in terms of possible delays in making needed decisions, have been widely debated.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Before agreeing on the rules for institutions where the NIEO is to be negotiated, north and south need to agree
      that there will be an NIEO and that it will be created through negotiation. The northern crossing of ul Haq's
      philosophical bridge represents agreement on the first point, even though it remains to be seen whether or not
      the U.S. and its most powerful northern allies are deeply committed to a reformed international economic order.
      Yet, by itself, the north cannot assure that the <a id="page_149"></a>NIEO will be created through negotiation.
      The south has to agree.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Since 1974 the south has added an understanding of the need for negotiations to its ideology. The Group of
      77's earliest political analysis, the views predominant in the group from 1964 through the first years of the
      seventies, found its justification in Utopian principles of international law, "the sovereign equality of
      states," and in pluralist theories of DMC government. The group later adopted a political analysis taken
      from realist theories of international relations, emphasizing the projection of power in an essentially
      heartless, anarchic world, the analysis that led to theories of collective self-reliance and collective economic
      security as well as to justifications of the OPEC price increases. After 1974 the south adopted a new political
      analysis, emphasizing what could be done through international negotiation. If pluralist theories of DMC
      governments and realist theories of international relations can be said to have motivated the first two Group of
      77 political analyses, the whole range of theories about negotiation can be said to motivate the group's
      latest views.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The ideas about rule making taken from the report on U.N. reforms represent a later addition to this analysis.
      The south's preference for negotiation, rather than direct actions like the OPEC price increases, began in
      response to the conciliatory northern positions at the Seventh Special Session. The fact that OPEC's success
      could not be replicated by other commodity producing countries reinforced the third world preference for
      negotiation.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The LDCs' experience with CIEC made them challenge some of the north's conventional wisdom about what
      makes for successful negotiations. After the Sixth Special Session, the developed countries, especially the
      United States, had argued in favor of more intimate negotiating sessions on a limited number of topics. From the
      south's point of view CIEC, which followed this model, was a near disaster. After CIEC the south emphasized
      that universal agreement in principle to the NIEO was needed before smaller meetings on specifics could be
      fruitful. Thus the south adopted something similar to the Club of Rome's suggestion that a framework treaty
      be worked out by all U.N. members.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The obvious failure of this policy led to reevaluation of what had been wrong with the northern preference for
      meetings of a few countries on a few topics in the first place. The LDCs reiterated that such meetings could not
      fully represent the diversity of opinion in the third world. But, at this early stage of negotiation at least,
      another failure of CIEC proved more telling. Not only had CIEC failed to consider the views of all countries or
      to integrate all topics, the negotiations began without agreement on a need for an <a id="page_150"></a>NIEO.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      That, in fact, had been a deliberate decision by the most powerful developed states. Their governments felt that
      agreement in principle between north and south would prove impossible. The best that could be hoped for was
      agreements on specific small reforms arrived at through the exchange of concessions between north and
      south.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0366" id="bck_fn0366">94</a>) The most powerful northern states thus acted
      against William Zartman's dictum that a formula for international agreement has to be arrived at before the
      details of any successful agreement can be worked out.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0367" id="bck_fn0367">95</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The south recognized the usefulness of this dictum only after the failures of the committee of the whole and
      after the Brandt Commission made alternative suggestions. Cancun's limited size allowed ideas to be shared
      but unlike CIEC, Cancun aimed at agreement on a general formula for later north-south negotiations. Nonetheless,
      the choice of participants at Cancun precluded wide-ranging debate on possible formulas for an NIEO. Most of the
      participants stood with the south. Cancun could only have had one of two outcomes. The U.S., Germany, and the
      U.K. could agree to the formulas proposed by the south, or else no agreement would occur at all. In fact both
      occurred.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The overall direction of change in the south's political analysis since 1974 should be clear. The Group of 77
      has moved ever closer to a relatively sophisticated analysis of what is needed in order for there to be a
      successfully negotiated NIEO. The Cancun summit suggests that the south has yet to reach the conclusion that
      substantive debate on a formula for an NIEO is needed. In such debate the south would have to remain as open to
      being convinced as it demands that its opponents be. Nonetheless, the Group of 77's thinking has moved in
      that direction, as evidenced since 1974 by the increasing moderation of some southern economic demands and by the
      specific moves of north-south negotiations to forums where substantive debate is likely, as well as by the
      south's support of an increasing role for U.N. conciliation procedures that allow for substantive debate.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Ready explanations for the direction of southern thinking can be found. The theories cited at the beginning of
      this chapter suggest this direction. My conclusions based on Apter's views about mobilizing ideologies also
      could be reached by thinking about the conflict resolution needed to created international regimes. The dean of
      British peace researchers, Adam Curie, demonstrates that, paradoxically, in conflicts between apparently unequal
      parties, like the north-south conflict, a period of confrontation is necessary before the conflict can be
      resolved. The confrontation is needed in order for both parties to begin to take the weaker one as a serious
      partner whose interests will have to be <a id="page_151"></a>consulted in resolving the conflict.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0368" id="bck_fn0368">96</a>) The oil price increases were such a confrontation. If they
      did nothing else, they made many northern policy makers aware of the third world's demands for the first
      time.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      At times confrontations between previously weaker and previously stronger parties can make both equally powerful
      on all dimensions, but that is not essential to conflict resolution. It would be essential if the parties tried
      to resolve their conflict simply by exchanging concessions. A weaker party, with less to exchange, would find it
      difficult to get what it wanted from the stronger and could easily feel aggrieved by any bargained, temporary
      resolution.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      If, on the other hand, the parties committed themselves to resolving their conflict by developing a single view
      of their mutual interests, rather than by exchanging concessions to partially satisfy their separate interests, a
      weaker and stronger party could, in theory, resolve their conflict to the full satisfaction of both. That would
      mean a commitment to substantive political debate, to trying to convince each other and to being willing to be
      convinced, something a good deal more complex than just exchanging concessions.(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0369" id="bck_fn0369">97</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In fact, the conflicts among the states whose interests have to be satisfied in order to create an international
      regime must be resolved, at least in part, through substantive debate. The actual experience of the United States
      in founding the postwar system with its weaker western European partners illustrates the point. American policy
      makers may have tried just to strike bargains with their weaker partners and never amend U.S. views, but that was
      not enough. The U.S. convinced European leaders of the validity of the basic tenets of the system it was trying
      to create. It had to. Regimes are "principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures around which an
      actor's expectations converge in a given area of international relations."(<a href="Ch05.xhtml#fn0370" id="bck_fn0370">98</a>) While it is possible for such principles, norms, and rules to be unconscious, it
      is unlikely that a regime of unconscious rules can be created when a conflict over different possible regimes has
      made states all the more conscious of strongly-held, conflicting views. International regimes can only be created
      out of a conscious disagreement over what regimes should be by consciously resolving that disagreement. That
      means by substantive political debate, not by mere bargaining that preserves the disagreement or by any other
      strategic action, like the OPEC price increases, alone.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      To the extent that practical concerns continue to motivate the NIEO ideology, its advocates will be forced to
      recognize that substantive north-south debate on a formula for a new order is needed before international
      economic regimes can actually be reformed. The only significant innovations in the NIEO ideology since 1974
      <a id="page_152"></a>already point in that direction.
    </div>
<div class="footnote">
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0034"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0034">Notes</a></h2>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0274">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0274">{1)</a>Ul Haq's Sept. 1975 speech quoted in his The <span class="underline">Poverty Curtain</span> (New Yorks Columbia Univ. Press, 1977), p. 147. Brandt quoted in
        <span class="underline">Washington Post</span>, Dec. 18, 1979, p. A20.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0275">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0275">(2)</a>This view of substantive debate comes from Anatol Rapoport,
        <span class="underline">Fights, Games and Debates</span> (Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press, 1960), pp.
        245-309.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0276">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0276">(3)</a>These characterizations of different northern positions follow
        those in Robert Cassen et al., eds., <span class="underline">Rich Country Interests and Third World
        Development</span> (London: Croom Helm, 19821·
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0277">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0277">(4)</a>Selected Documents, Lome Convention, Feb. 28, 1975, pp. 601-19.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0278">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0278">(5)</a>Cf. Lima Declaration and Plan of Action, Mar. 1975, quoted in
        Ervin Laszlo et al., <span class="underline">The Objectives of the New International Economic Order</span> (New
        York: Pergamon Press, 1978), p. 160.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0279">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0279">(6)</a><span class="underline">Official Records of the General
        Assembly Seventh</span> Special Session, Sept. 1, 1975 (New York: United Nations, 1977), p. 1-3.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0280">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0280">(7)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, pp. 7-13.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0281">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0281">(8)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 14.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0282">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0282">(9)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, Sept. 4, 1975, p. 4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0283">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0283">(10)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, Sept. 3, 1975, p. 14-16.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0284">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0284">(11)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, Sept. 2, 1975, p. 10.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0285">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0285">(12)</a>Just Faaland and Ole Norbye, "Interests of Scandinavian
        Countries in Third World Development," in Cassen, p. 288.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0286">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0286">(13)</a>Catherine Gwin, "The Seventh Special Session: Toward a
        New Phase of Relations Between the Developed and Developing States," in Karl P. Sauvant and Hajo
        Hasenpflug, eds., <span class="underline">The New International Economic Order: Confrontation or Cooperation
        Between North and South?</span> (Boulder: Westview Press, 1977), pp. 106-108.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0287">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0287">(14)</a><span class="underline">Seventh Special Session</span>, Sept.
        1, 1975, p. 12.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0288">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0288">(15)</a>E.g. Madagascar, speaking for the Group of 77, Second, 30,
        Oct. 6, 1975, p. 30.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0289">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0289">(16)</a><span class="underline">New York Times</span>, June 6, 1983,
        p. 23.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0290">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0290">(17)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 31, Oct. 1, 1976, p. 5.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0291">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0291">(18)</a>Phillippines, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 31, Oct.
        1, 1976, p. 11.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0292">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0292">(19)</a>Karl P. Sauvant, "Representing the Collective Economic
        Interest of the Third World: The Group of 77," Presented at the annual meeting of the International
        Studies Association, Philadelphia, Mar. 1981, p. 22.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0293">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0293">(20)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 31, Oct. 15, 1976, p.
        2.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0294">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0294">(21)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 33, Oct. 23, 1978, p.
        6.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0295">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0295">(22)</a>Jeffrey Hart, <span class="underline">The New International
        Economic</span> Order (London: Macmillan) forthcoming) 1983)", chpt. 1. C2 3)Jan Tinbergen, coordinator,
        <span class="underline">Reshaping</span> <a id="page_153"></a><span class="underline">International
        Order</span> (New York: Ε. P. Dutton, 1976).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0296">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0296">(24)</a>Cf. <span class="underline">Ibid</span>., pp. 16-69 and
        <span class="underline">Second</span>, 31, Oct.18, 1976, p. 8.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0297">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0297">(25)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 31, Oct. 1, 1976, p. 7.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0298">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0298">(26)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 32, Oct. 6, 1977, p.13.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0299">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0299">(27)</a>C£. Tinbergen, p. 176-88, and <span class="underline">Second</span>, 32, Oct. 7, 1977, p. 4-7.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0300">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0300">(28)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 32, Oct. 13, 1977, p.
        10. The fact that Latin American states (Argentina in addition to Brazil, Mexico, and Peru) pushed proposals
        found in the third Club of Rome report may have something to do with the fact that Colegio de Mexico President
        Victor L. Urquidi, widely respected among Latin American economists, was part of the Club of Rome team and the
        only third world member on both the subcommittee dealing with disarmament and the one dealing with
        negotiations.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0301">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0301">(29)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 32, Oct. 7, 1977, p. 4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0302">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0302">(30)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., p. 7.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0303">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0303">(31)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 32, Oct. 18, 1977, pp.
        14-20.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0304">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0304">(32)</a>See Robert W. Cox on Trilateralism in "Ideologies and the
        New International Economic Order," <span class="underline">International Organization</span> 33 (Spring
        1979): 267-73.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0305">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0305">(33p</a>Towards a Renovated International System," (New York:
        Trilateral Commission Triangle Paper #14, 1977), pp. 41-42.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0306">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0306">(34)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 34, Oct. 9, 1979, p.
        15.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0307">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0307">(35)</a>Cf. Algeria, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 33, Oct.
        23, 1978, p. 11 on what little the south expected.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0308">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0308">(36)</a><span class="underline">Official Records of the General
        Assembly Eleventh Special Session</span>, August 26, 1980, pp. 51-55. <span class="underline">Global 2000
        Report to the President</span>, 3 vols. (New Yorks Pergamon Press) 1980).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0309">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0309">(37)</a>Quoted in Leonard Silk, "The New U.S. View of the
        World," <span class="underline">New York Times</span>, May 4, 1979, p. D2.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0310">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0310">(38)</a>Independent Commission on International Development,
        <span class="underline">North-South</span> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1980).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0311">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0311">(39)</a>The Brandt Commission actually envisioned a more authoritative
        summit than the unstructured discussion that actually took place.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0312">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0312">(40)</a>Secretaria de Relationes Exteriores, <span class="underline">Cancun 1981: Framework, Debates, and Conclusions of the Meeting on International Cooperation and
        Development</span> (Mexico, D.F.: 1982), pp. 65-75.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0313">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0313">(41)</a>See the discussion of the Reagan position by Edward
        Heath's north-south issues coordinator Duffey Asher, "Negotiations and the Law of the Sea,"
        Senior thesis in political science, Wellesley College, 1982.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0314">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0314">(42)</a>Secretaria de Relationes Exteriores, pp. 72-76.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0315">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0315">(43)</a>"Perspective: The World Economy," <span class="underline">U.N. Monthly Chronicle</span> 19 (Oct. 1979): 38.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0316">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0316">(44)</a>See Mexico's summary of the history of the disarmament
        negotiations in the U.N., <span class="underline">Official Records of the General Assembly Tenth Special
        Session</span>, 1978, p. 43.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0317">
<sub class="item5"><a class="calibre4" href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0317">(45)</a></sub> <span class="underline"><sub class="item5">Ibid</sub></span><sub class="item5">.</sub>
</div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0318">
<a id="page_154"></a><a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0318">(46)</a><span class="underline">North-South</span>, p. 117-25.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0319">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0319">(47)</a>Ibrahim Abdel Rahman, "The Most Basic Need: The Will to
        Develop Rationally," in Anthony J. Dolman and Jan van Ettinger, eds., <span class="underline">Partners in
        Tomorrow</span> (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1978), p. 8.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0320">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0320">(48)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, and see Sartaj Aziz,
        "The Search for Common Ground," in Dolman and van Ettinger, pp. 17-19.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0321">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0321">(49)</a><span class="underline">New York Times</span>, Apr. 13, 1979,
        p. Dl.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0322">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0322">(50)</a><span class="underline">Washington Post</span>, May 26, 1979,
        p. A34.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0323">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0323">(51)</a>Quoted in <span class="underline">New York Times</span>, Apr.
        13, 1979, p. D3.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0324">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0324">(52)</a>E.g., India, repeating the Group of 77 position, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 34, Oct. 1, 1979, p. 8.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0325">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0325">(53)</a>See Cox, pp. 260-61 on the influence of the south's social
        democratic northern supporters.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0326">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0326">(54)</a>In addition to the Pearson Report see Robert Packenham,
        <span class="underline">Liberal America and the Third World</span> (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1973).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0327">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0327">(55)</a>Don Mills, "The North-South Dialogue: Background and
        Present Position," in Dolman and van Ettinger, p. 69.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0328">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0328">(56)</a>Gunnar Myrdal, <span class="underline">Development and
        Underdevelopment</span> (Cairo: National Bank of Egypt, 1954).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0329">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0329">(57)</a>Hart, chpt. 4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0330">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0330">(58)</a>Michael Harrington, <span class="underline">The Vast Majority:
        A Journey to the World's Poor</span> (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1977), pp. 14-35.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0331">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0331">(59)</a>Quoted in Laszlo, p. 151.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0332">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0332">(60)</a>Quoted in Laszlo, p. 152.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0333">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0333">(61)</a><span class="underline">Washington Post</span>, May 27, 1979,
        p. A34.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0334">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0334">(62)</a>Naipaul's nonfiction exploration of modern India takes him
        to an institution where these concerns are so directed, V. S. Naipaul, India: A <span class="underline">Wounded
        Civilization</span> (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 19777, pp. 125-45.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0335">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0335">(63)</a>Ignancy Sachs discusses these developments in his excellent
        account of the north-south agreement on issues of the environment and industrialization beginning with Henry
        Kissinger's rejection of the Cocoyoc Declaration and ending with the implications of the U.S. rejection of
        the Law of the Sea Treaty, "Environment and Development: Ten Years After Stockholm Conference,"
        <span class="underline">Alternatives</span> 8 (Winter 1982): 369-78.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0336">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0336">(64)</a>Laszlo, pp. 120-42.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0337">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0337">(65)</a>Brazil's draft is UNCTAD document TD/b/C. 6/AC.1/ L.6,
        Nov. 28, 1975, pp. 1-4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0338">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0338">(66)</a>UNCTAD document TD/CODE TOT/lO, Dec. 22, 1978.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0339">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0339">(67)</a>Laszlo, p. 10.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0340">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0340">(68)</a>Cf. the two codes quoted in Laszlo, pp. 131-32, 138-41.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0341">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0341">(69)</a>Summarized in Laszlo, pp. 27-28.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0342">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0342">(70)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., p. 29.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0343">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0343">(71)</a>Interview with Margaret G. de Vries, Historian of the
        International Monetary Fund, Washington, June 1979.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0344">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0344">(72)</a>Quoted in Laszlo, p. 12.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0345">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0345">(73)</a>Quoted in <span class="underline">Ibid</span>., p.13.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0346">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0346">(74)</a>Laszlo, p. 13.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0347">
<a id="page_155"></a><a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0347">(75)</a> William R. Cline, "Brazil's
        Emerging International Economic Role," in Riodan Roet, ed., <span class="underline">Brazil in the
        Seventies</span> (Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1976), p. 71.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0348">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0348">(76)</a>Paul Streeten, "The New International Economic
        Order," unpublished paper, Washington, June 7, 1979, p. 16. See also his, "Constructive Responses to
        the North-South Dialogue," in Edwin P. Reuben, ed., <span class="underline">The Challenge of the New
        International Economic_Order</span>. (Boulder: Westview), p. 88.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0349">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0349">(77)</a>Independent Commission on International Development,
        <span class="underline">Common Crisis</span> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1983).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0350">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0350">(78)</a> <span class="underline">Νew_ York Τimes</span>, June 7, 1983,
        p. 30.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0351">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0351">(79)</a>Laszlo, p. 107.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0352">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0352">(80)</a>Documents of the Group of 20, quoted in Laszlo, p. 105.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0353">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0353">(81)</a><span class="underline">Washington Post</span>, Sept. 24,
        1978, p. A4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0354">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0354">(82)</a><span class="underline">Economist</span>, Aug. 21, 1976, p.
        121.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0355">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0355">(83)</a>C. Clyde Ferguson, "The New International Economic
        Order," in David M. Kay, ed., <span class="underline">The Changing United Nations</span> (New York:
        Academy of Political Science, 1978), p. 152.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0356">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0356">(84)</a>Robert Rothstein, <span class="underline">Global Bargaining:
        UNCTAD and the Quest for a New International Economic Order</span> (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 19791, p.
        69.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0357">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0357">(85)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 142.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0358">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0358">(86)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 69.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0359">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0359">(87)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 20.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0360">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0360">(88)</a>For the provisions and states included see Selected Documents,
        Lome Convention.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0361">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0361">(89)</a>Cf. Cox, pp. 280-85, 289-300.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0362">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0362">(90)</a><span class="underline">Washington Post</span>, Dec. 17, 1979,
        p. Al.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0363">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0363">(91)</a>Laszlo, pp.176-77.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0364">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0364">(92)</a>See for example the position of the Commonwealth Group of
        Experts quoted in Laszlo, p. 186.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0365">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0365">(93)</a>Laszlo, p. 178.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0366">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0366">(94)</a>C. Fred Bergsten, "Cartel Power to Common Fund,"
        <span class="underline">Interdependent</span>, Mar. 1979, p. 17.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0367">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0367">(95)</a> <span class="italic">I.</span> William Zartman and Maureen R.
        Berman, <span class="underline">The Practical Negotiator</span> (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1982).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0368">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0368">(96)</a>Adam Curle, <span class="underline">Making Peace</span>
        (London: Tavistock, 1971), pp. 196-208.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0369">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0369">(97)</a>While Rapoport does the most complete job of explaining the
        complexities, the same message can be found in Roger Fisher and William Ury's popular treatment of
        "principled negotiation," <span class="underline">Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without
        Giving In</span> (Boston: Houghton Mifflini 1981).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0370">
<a href="Ch05.xhtml#bck_fn0370">(98)</a>Stephen D. Krasner, "Structural Causes and Regime
        Consequences: Regimes as Intervening Variables," <span class="underline">International Organization</span>
        36 (Spring 1982): 186.
      </div>
</div>

<br class="end-page"/></div>