<div class="delete">

<h1 id="ht0035"><a id="page_156"></a><a id="page_157"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0035">5
    <br class="calibre1"/>
    The NIEO Ideology as Ideology</a></h1>
<div class="quotes">
<div class="text_noindent">
        . . . developing countries realize that their pattern of development will have to be different from that of the
        industrialized countries. They . . . adopt the present criteria of the industrialized countries as their target
        -- namely modernization and catching up with the rich. They pay the price — a dual society and wide income
        disparities — then frustration and instability. They carefully guard their recently acquired political
        independence and national identity, but they are the weaker partner, and hence the fear of domination — not
        only politically and economically, but even culturally.
      </div>
<div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Ibrahim Helmi Abdel Rahman
      </div>
</div>
<div class="quotes">
<div class="text_noindent">
        The rejection of irrational constraints by each state had produced worldwide irrationality. At the same time
        the integration of the upper classes of developing countries into the international system has contributed to
        national dualism, national division, and national disintegration in some developing countries. Hence the call
        for "delinking" and the assertion of a national identity based on indigenous values.
      </div>
<div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Paul Streeten(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0371" id="bck_fn0371">l</a>)
      </div>
</div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This final chapter recapitulates and summarizes what the NIEO ideology is before examining the global, national,
      and personal interests that the ideology serves. I reach the same conclusion as Streeten and former UNIDO
      Director Abdel Rahman: The NIEO ideology cannot be fully understood apart from the positions of developing
      countries within the international system, the position of its advocates within developing nations' domestic
      social systems, and the position of its <a id="page_158"></a>advocates within international society. The personal
      experiences many NIEO advocates share reinforce their commitment to the ideology they constructed to explain and
      try to transform the Bretton Woods system.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This discussion of the interests the new order ideology serves leads naturally into a discussion of the
      ideology's future. I discuss the most likely developments throughout this chapter to help illustrate
      fundamental elements of the ideology or the interests it serves. I leave more speculative discussion of the way
      the ideology might develop to the afterword.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0036"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0036">Key Elements of the New Order
    Ideology</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      The NIEO ideology can be thought of as divided into two parts: A set of principles and a technical policy
      analysis. This analysis includes economic goals, factors affecting those goals, proposed economic policies
      designed to manipulate those factors, an analysis of political impediments to those policies, and political
      strategies to overcome those impediments. The new order technical analysis can be viewed as a rationally
      integrated unit, a causal model of the economic and political factors affecting third world economic
      goals.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0372" id="bck_fn0372">2</a>) NIEO principles both define the need for and
      set moral limits on the NIEO policy analysis.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">New Order Principles</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      Three new order principles have been part of the ideology since its beginning:
    </div>
<ul class="simple">
<li class="calibre2">- the need for international management of the global economy</li>
<li class="calibre2">- the economic rights and duties of states</li>
<li class="calibre2">- the equality of individual states</li>
</ul>
<div class="text_noindent">
      The other two arose out of the compromises between more and less radical third world states when the Bretton
      Woods system began to break down at the beginning of the 1970s:
    </div>
<ul class="simple">
<li class="calibre2">- the moral obligation of past and present exploiters to negotiate the reform of existing international
      economic systems</li>
<li class="calibre2">- the duty of current exploiter states to compensate their victims</li>
</ul>
<div class="text_indent">
      The most fundamental NIEO principle, the need for some degree of rational international management of the <a id="page_159"></a>world economy, requires the creation of the NIEO policy analysis. It demands that analysis unlike
      the other NIEO principles which restrict it.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The second fundamental NIEO principle, the south's special version of the economic rights and duties of
      states, sets limits on that policy analysis. Under this principle the south affirms the rights of national
      governments to choose their own economic system and to control the natural resources within their territory. The
      most important duty of states remains to aid the economic development of materially less advantaged countries.
      The south often links this specific duty with the fundamental rights it affirms in formulas that encompass all
      elements of the second principle, such as, "the right to develop," "collective
      self-reliance," and "collective economic security." Other duties include protection of the global
      environment and other "common heritages."
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      A final fundamental NIEO principle affirms that separate states are equal in their rights and duties. As an
      instance of this principle, the south affirms that conflicts about international economic matters that cannot be
      resolved by appealing to economic science or to prior agreement on principle must be resolved by political means
      that treat each state as equally powerful, either majority rule of states or consensus.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The two more recent additions to the south's principles incorporate the restitution ethic proposed in the
      sixties by more radical nations. States that either have benefited from exploitation from third world regions in
      the past or continue to do so today have a moral obligation to reform the existing international economic system
      through negotiations. Likewise, those states that have continued such exploitative actions after the adoption of
      the General Assembly's Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States have a duty to compensate their
      victims directly.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0373" id="bck_fn0373">3</a>)
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">New Order Goals</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      As Abdel Rahman states, the primary new order goal remains industrial development in the third world. NIEO
      advocates believe that the other benefits of modernization will flow from industry. Many other goals that third
      world spokesmen cite as elements of the new order program are simply means to encourage third world industry.
      Thus, meeting the basic needs of people throughout the world, working toward worldwide disarmament, maintaining
      the economic growth of developed nations, and preventing protectionism among DMC's are NIEO goals to the
      extent that they contribute to industrialization.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      NIEO advocates consider other development goals even less important because proposing them as universale would
      contradict new order principles. For example, population <a id="page_160"></a>control can be an NIEO goal of some
      states because it may contribute to industrialization, but it cannot be a general NIEO goal because some third
      world states consider it anathema to the economic systems they have chosen.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">The New Order Analysis of the World Economy</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      NIEO advocates consider the prospects for industrialization in the third world to be influenced by one major
      factor, the power the third world has over north-south economic transactions relative to the power developed
      countries have. NIEO advocates further divide that factor into three parts. The comparative power of north and
      south over trade appeared in NIEO analysis first, in the forties. The comparative power of north and south over
      development financing appeared only slightly later. Finally, new order advocates added a detailed analysis of the
      comparative power of north and south over TNC investment only after dependency scholars began their studies in
      the late sixties and early seventies. TNC investment influences the availability of technology for third world
      industrial development, a factor that NIEO advocates sometimes treat separately.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">Economic Policies Advocated as Part of the NIEO</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      To increase the south's industrial capabilities, NIEO advocates have supported all forms of technical
      assistance since the foundation of the U.N. Most recently these have included programs to assure the free
      transfer of technology owned by northern governments. In an effort to assure that TNC investment can be used
      toward the same end, the south advocates a binding international code of conduct for TNCs. The code would
      increase the power of third world governments relative to that of firms based in the developed world.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In order to increase the relative power of the third world over north-south trade, the south advocates that
      tariff preferences continue to be granted to the developing states. The south also supports the IPC's program
      of commodity agreements backed by a unified system of financing buffer stocks in order to discourage the
      competition among southern producers of raw materials and thus avoid downward trends in the prices of third world
      goods (at the expense of dampening upward price movements as well, it should be added). The south also supports
      any direct action by third world raw material producers to maintain and raise prices whenever possible, although
      OPEC's successes have yet to be repeated.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In order to increase the relative power of the south over development financing, third world governments have
      consistently supported channeling all aid through multilateral institutions. Third world concerns for <a id="page_161"></a>disarmament and for maintaining economic growth in developed countries have to be understood as
      ways to assure or increase multilateral aid. The SDR-Link proposal serves the same function; the NIEO desire to
      increase the power of the IMF to that of a global central bank should be understood primarily as a means to make
      the Link feasible. Southern proposals for both generalized and individual debt relief would increase the power of
      third world states over development financing more directly. The south's support of compensatory financing
      for trade income shortfalls and other financial and monetary reforms of the Bretton Woods system also serve the
      same end of increasing southern power over development financing.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">The New Order Political Strategy</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      Except for direct action on prices by third world commodity producers, all of the major NIEO economic policies
      require north-south cooperation. Thus, since 1974 the south's political strategy has evolved into one of
      negotiation. The south has integrated earlier concerns with direct action and attempts to influence northern
      opinion into an overall strategy for negotiation. Earlier strategies are now used to help build consensus in the
      north that negotiation is necessary. The south remains wary of conducting negotiations in forums and under rules
      that do not give it an advantage. Nonetheless, the futility of that position has made NIEO advocates move
      continually closer to accepting a process of negotiation that would allow the south's new order program to be
      amended, the system of global negotiations based on a framework consensus in the General Assembly, to be followed
      by separate negotiations within each of the specialized agencies of the U.N. that deal with economic matters,
      under rules designed to achieve conciliation between north and south.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">Elements of the NIEO Ideology Most Likely to Change</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      The changes in new order strategy visible in the last decade should not be surprising. The fundamental NIEO
      commitment to rational policy analysis assures that, within the boundaries established by other new order
      principles, policies that fail will be discarded. No southern strategy for achieving the NIEO has worked yet.
      Consequently, we should expect the south to experiment with new strategies.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Likewise, the commitment to rational policy analysis assures that the south will abandon or replace the economic
      policies if they prove unsuccessful in achieving the south's goals. As of yet, no NIEO policy proposal has
      been completely abandoned? none has been proven a failure in practice, and economists still disagree over the
      <a id="page_162"></a>probable effects of the proposals. Nonetheless, even the economic analysis of critics of the
      NIEO gives us reason to believe that the south will add new economic policy proposals in the future.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      A 1979 Overseas Development Council study of all the NIEO policies then proposed concluded that even if all were
      enacted, they would assure only a moderate increase in third world per capita income. (<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0374" id="bck_fn0374">4</a>) To the extent that per capita income is a reliable indicator of third world
      development goals, and (as Abdel Rahman suggests) it probably is, NIEO advocates will have to find additional
      means to achieve their goals.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Another group of northern economists recently concluded that the NIEO policies would work primarily to the
      benefit of the most developed third world states.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0375" id="bck_fn0375">5</a>) To
      the extent that the new order alliance remains committed to its principle of the equal treatment of states? such
      unequal benefits would be unacceptable, assuring that additional policies would have to be adopted.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      These probable changes in NIEO strategy and economic analysis would result directly from the confrontation
      between the new order ideology and reality. Another change in the ideology could arise from a conflict within the
      ideology itself. Yet it might take substantive debate between north and south to make NIEO advocates worry about
      that conflict.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The conflict appears in the confused relationships among some of the NIEO principles. New order advocates take a
      realm of rational management of the world economy to be necessary, but circumscribe that realm by the principle
      that states are equal in their economic rights and duties. The relationship between the realm of management and
      the realm of the economic rights and duties of states remains unclear.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Conceivably, the realm of international management could be understood as completely subservient to equal
      states' rights, meaning that any individual state would have a right to contradict the rational management
      policies of the NIEO. The south's continual affirmations of state sovereignty and proposals to let any state
      have effective veto over proposed NIEO reforms suggests that interpretation. But as Keynes pointed out nearly
      forty years ago, the absolute subjection of international institutions to the will of even one nation-state
      contradicts the idea that there are global needs that only rational global economic management can meet. An NIEO
      based on the principle that global management must be absolutely subservient to the policies of national
      governments would simply institutionalize the system Streeten already sees as existent, a world in which state
      interventions to rationalize national economies are expected, yet no coherent effort can be made to rationalize
      the separate policies of separate states.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
<a id="page_163"></a>The south might only wish to affirm that the realm of equal states ' rights creates
      boundaries on the realm of economic management. That appears to be what NIEO supporters argue when they say that
      specific policies, like birth control, cannot be adopted as a quid pro quo for aid from international
      institutions.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      To make that relationship clear the NIEO ideology would not only have to specify the economic rights and duties
      of states, it would also have to specify the rights and duties of international economic institutions, thus
      specifying the boundaries of the realm of rational management of the world economy. In fact the dialogue over
      global negotiations might result in such a clarification since the northern powers opposed to the south's
      formula, the U.S., U.K., and West German, couch their opposition in terms of support of the integrity of existing
      international economic institutions. Agreement on the specific limits on the autonomous realms of international
      economic institutions would overcome the existing impasse in negotiations.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">Elements of the Ideology Likely to Remain Unchanged</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      Even if some parts of the NIEO ideology might change as a result of negotiations, the history of the ideology
      suggests that others will not change as long as the third world alliance remains. Some of the elements appear to
      be permanent simply because they have been part of the ideology since its beginning. The third world goal of
      industrial development has been affirmed by native governments in Asia, Africa, and Latin America since the
      depression. The goal was part of the ideology of independent Asian, African, and Latin American governments at
      the U.N. even before they adopted NIEO principles. Similarly, the principles of international management and the
      equality of states in their rights and duties have been part of the ideology from the beginning. We have no way
      of conceiving of the ideology without them.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Recognizing the goal of third world industrial development and the fundamental NIEO principles as permanent
      elements of the ideology, we could conceive that its adherents might abandon their belief that differences in
      power over north-south economic transactions explain the industrialization of the north and the lack of industry
      in the south if further study (authorized by the principle of rational policy analysis) proved this assumption
      false.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Nonetheless, I believe this analysis may be as fundamental to the new order ideology as any other element. It
      does more than help explain the south's lack of development; it helps define the identity that members of the
      third world alliance share. All have similar grievances with the present economic order. It is not <a id="page_164"></a>just that some third world states were colonies when the present order was created while others
      were independent but rarely consulted by those who created the system; more importantly, all third world states
      suffered from a similar position in the world political economy as a whole. The analysis makes third world
      countries appear as natural allies. Appeals to similar grievances, or even to a similar desire for development,
      would not suggest the need for alliance the way a claim to a similar history does.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">The New Internationalism</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      Many of those who have studied the NIEO ideology before have tried to capture its most permanent elements in an
      even more abstract form than the outline above, labeling the ideology with the name of an older, more familiar
      philosophy. After all, as Clifford Geertz says when discussing ideology itself, we often expand knowledge by
      giving something new an old name.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0376" id="bck_fn0376">6</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      But none of the old names offered for the NIEO ideology are quite satisfying. Even calling the ideology a
      "new internationalism," and meaning by that that it is a more coherent expression of the
      "internationalism" identified by Sukarno and Nehru in the fifties, would not be completely accurate.
      Nonetheless, illustrating the ways in which the labels do or do not fit can help clarify what the NIEO ideology
      is, and even what it might become.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The NIEO ideology resembles Fabianism, as Daniel Patrick Moynihan first recognized,(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0377" id="bck_fn0377">7</a>) in that it supports social controls on the market. Despite the claims of some
      northern economists, the NIEO ideology certainly suggests no more bureaucratization and control of the global
      economy than Fabians advocate for domestic economies in developed countries. The market remains central. NIEO
      trade proposals rely on the market. Third world officials ignore straightforward proposals for fixing prices,
      such as having an international agency empowered to set prices and penalize violators, the way wage and price
      controls work within many countries.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      But "Fabianism" fails to capture the NIEO ideology for the same reason "international
      Keynesianism" or any other global form of corporatism does. The role of the state in the new ideology
      differs. The NIEO ideology justifies a compact of states, not a compact of classes, sectors, or individuals.
      Keynes's vision of what Fred Block calls "internationally organized state capitalism"(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0378" id="bck_fn0378">8</a>) was designed to overcome the resistance of national
      governments to a realm of rational management of the world economy by creating cross-national class coalitions.
      Fabians, who emphasize the political equality of individuals, might imagine the same possibility. NIEO advocates,
      who are concerned more about the equal <a id="page_165"></a>treatment of states, could not.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      For similar reasons, attempts to justify or criticize the NIEO ideology on the basis of John Rawls's liberal
      theory of justice fail to correctly characterize the ideology. Rawls argues that if people chose social rules
      without knowing their own position in society they would meet all basic needs and only let the well off gain when
      the least advantaged gained as well.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0379" id="bck_fn0379">9</a>) But NIEO
      supporters only advocate basic needs development as a means toward another end, not, as Rawls does, as a goal in
      itself. Extended to be an ethic of international relations, Rawls's theory justifies duties of individuals in
      one state to individuals in other states.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0380" id="bck_fn0380">10</a>) It does
      not address the NIEO claims about the rights and duties of states to each other.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Critics who call the NIEO ideology "mercantilism" can deal with the rights of states, at least as they
      are reflected in the western tradition of international law.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0381" id="bck_fn0381">11</a>) But the NIEO ideology defines duties of states that go beyond respecting others'
      rights. And the central concern of the new order ideology remains the activities of international institutions
      designed to help manage the world economy, something traditional mercantilists never thought of. Calling the NIEO
      ideology "mercantilism" also fails to capture the notion of positive duties of states toward one
      another, something the other proposed names for the ideology ignore as well.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Calling the ideology a "new internationalism" emphasizes the positive duties by recalling the contrast
      with cosmopolitanism that Sukarno outlined in the 1950s. Sukarno sought to maintain the cultural diversity and
      cultural autonomy of existing groups. "Internationalism" is even more appropriate to the NIEO ideology
      than to Sukarno's domestic governing ideology. The NIEO aims to preserve only the cultural diversity and
      autonomy of nation-states, not of cultures which exist subnationally.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      While "new internationalism" does not capture many of the elements of the NIEO ideology, especially the
      role of government as the sole legitimate definer of culture, it does suggest some new ways to understand the
      ideology. Just as there is a larger universe of philosophical writings on the ethics of social democracy and
      liberalism to which the "Fabian" and "Rawlsian" parts of the NIEO debate can be compared,
      many arguments about the need for maintaining cultural diversity exist.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0382" id="bck_fn0382">12</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Even a Rawlsian argument for the ethics of the new internationalism could be constructed: Individuals deciding
      upon social rules would take into account that their culture will give them their identity. They may choose a
      world in which cultures, including their own, can die out in competition with others. Or they may choose a world
      which fosters cultural diversity through collective self-reliance, an NIEO-like alternative. To avoid alienation
      they would choose the NIEO.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
<a id="page_166"></a>This example is not chosen as the most compelling justification for the ethics of the new
      internationalism,(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0383" id="bck_fn0383">13</a>) but because it helps illustrate
      where potential sources of change in the new order ideology can exist outside the ideology itself. They appear in
      the interests of the those who advocate the ideology, the interests that the ideology helps them understand. In
      this case, as Abdel Rahman and Streeten both suggest, for some NIEO advocates, partial integration into the
      global upper class comes at the cost of cultural alienation, which, like any real concern NIEO advocates have,
      could become the basis for new ideological innovations.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Yet the personal concerns that NIEO advocates share would not be the first thing to consider when looking for the
      interests underlying the NIEO ideology. That is why the notion that creating a personal philosophy to deal with
      cultural alienation might be the primary source of new NIEO innovations does not quite ring true.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      I chose this example to illustrate that the new order's third world advocates can be thought of as sharing
      different interests, each apparent only at one level of analysis. They may share common personal interests based
      on their personal experience as members of a global elite. They also may share both conflicting and convergent
      interests as members of the governing elite of separate states. Finally they may share interests as leaders of
      nations that have a similar position in the world system.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Given the global focus of the new order ideology it make little sense to begin explaining its nature, origin, and
      future in terms of common domestic interests or similar personal experiences, even though some analysts have
      tried to explain NIEO doctrine by beginning at one of the less inclusive levels.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0384" id="bck_fn0384">14</a>) A more straightforward strategy involves going from the more inclusive to less
      inclusive levels of analysis, using purely domestic interests to explain only what cannot be explained as a
      result of common interests created by the world system and using common personal experiences to explain only what
      cannot be explained at both more inclusive levels. That is the strategy I follow below.
    </div>
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0045"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0045">Interests Underlying the NIEO
    Ideology</a></h2>
<div class="text_indent">
      The explanation for the emergence of the NIEO ideology offered in the introduction emphasizes interests third
      world officials share due to the similar positions of their states within the world system. It may have only been
      coincidence that the earliest new order advocates shared an interest in global regimes that would foster their
      industrial development. Nonetheless, the global process of agreeing upon postwar regimes assured that all <a id="page_167"></a>of them would become subject to the Bretton Woods system, yet be the only group of states subject
      to the system to have grievances with it from the very beginning.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      To define both those grievances and the reason for their alliance, the early new order supporters adopted the
      fundamental NIEO principles and the basic NIEO analysis of the world economy while the Bretton Woods system was
      still being created. Problems NIEO advocates suffered partially as a result of the operation of the Bretton Woods
      system triggered further amplification of their economic analysis. The alliance began to develop a shared
      political strategy and an analysis upon which it was based only after its members became conscious of a
      collective identity.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The first signs of the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system reinforced the alliance's identity, overcoming
      its members' conflicting national interests and convincing alliance members of the need to become more
      militant as well as more unified. When the alliance's systemically defined opposition, the north, began to
      fracture deeply as many northern governments and members of the northern nongovernmental elite began to support
      the third world program, the alliance slowly began to moderate its views to take some of its former
      opponents' interests into account and to emphasize more mutual means for resolving the systemic problems that
      the NIEO ideology identified and by which it was motivated.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">The Ideology's Function at a Global Level</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      As it is summarized above, the emergence of the NIEO ideology was part of the emergence of the third world as a
      relatively autonomous actor in world politics. Karl Deutsch's way of identifying autonomous actors(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0385" id="bck_fn0385">15</a>) illustrates how the ideology was able to play this role
      and suggests the limits of the third world as an actor.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Deutsch says that four functions of "consciousness" must be performed by a person or collectivity —
      e.g., corporation, party, nation, alliance -- that acts autonomously. It must have (1) memory and (2) ways to
      easily recall information from it. The actor must also have (3) ways to learn and (4) means to assure that what
      is learned can enter memory, what is remembered can influence what is learned, and what has been recalled is
      remembered. Memory provides the actor with a way to store both its goals and what it has learned about previous
      attempts to achieve them. The actor's openness to new information assures that it can develop strategies
      because it will be able to create a record of successes and failures upon which a strategy can be based. Means of
      assuring the constant transmission of information assure that both memory and learning can play their assigned
      roles.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The NIEO ideology helps serve two of these functions <a id="page_168"></a>for the third world. It is that part of
      the memory of the third world alliance within international organizations that officials can actually carry with
      them. At the same time the ideology's principle that rational policy analysis be used to guide global
      economic decision making helps assure that the third world alliance remains open to new information, that it has
      the capacity to learn.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Despite the significance of the NIEO ideology, other things contribute to these functions as well: The
      "memory" of the third world alliance within international organizations, the record of its goals, and
      what it has learned in the past also depend on the existence of a third world intellectual community including
      scholars, university officials, and publishers concerned with third world goals. The U.N. Secretariats and
      regional economic commissions also help play the same role. The research norms of social scientists interested in
      third world goals help assure that the alliance remains open to new information. The rapidly changing economic
      environment third world states found themselves in under the evolving Bretton Woods system contributed as well.
      And the existence of conflicts among third world governments required the alliance to either learn or break
      apart.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The ability of third world officials to consult the alliance's broader memory and the ease with which they
      agree upon lessons to be remembered has less to do with the NIEO ideology. Rather, the smooth functioning of
      these links in the alliance's "consciousness" was facilitated by the existence of the U.N.
      professional staffs, the development of personal trust among specific third world officials as they worked with
      each other through repeated conferences, the fact that any two third world representatives in the U.N. system
      could find at least one language they both knew, and the existence of common genres -- the resolutions and set
      phrases upon which so much of the debate within international organizations tends to focus.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In summary, the NIEO ideology functions as a key part of the "consciousness" of the third world. But,
      of course, "the third world" that has this consciousness only acts within certain arenas in the
      international system, especially in international organizations where economic matters are discussed.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This application of Deutsch's criteria suggests that the reality of the third world as an international actor
      is a bit different than many opponents of the NIEO have often assumed. For example, the existence of the third
      world as an international actor dedicated to the goals of the NIEO ideology could not be ended by pulling members
      out of the alliance. "Graduating" the more developed third world countries, say the OPEC countries and
      the newly industrialized nations, such as Singapore, into the developed world by giving them the rights and
      duties that northern states enjoy under Bretton Woods would do <a id="page_169"></a>nothing to abolish the
      memory, ways of learning, and links of consciousness which allow the third world to act. Even if officials of
      graduated states gave up the NIEO ideology, the third world would continue as an actor made up of other states.
      Convincing LLDC officials to call themselves a "fourth world" would do even less to the integrity of
      the third world as international actor. It would reinforce some of the conflict within the third world, but that
      conflict itself may be functional as something that keeps the alliance open to new information.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      A concerted attempt to abolish the third world as an international actor, without transforming the system to
      which the NIEO ideology emerged as a reaction, would have to involve destroying the other factors that contribute
      to the alliance's "consciousness." Such an effort might include destroying the third world
      intellectual community, abolishing the international organization staffs interested in NIEO issues, stabilizing
      the economic environment in which third world states find themselves, reducing the frequency of international
      meetings on economic matters, and frequently changing the standard procedures for conducting remaining meetings.
      In sum, the third world probably could not be destroyed as an international actor without either transforming the
      Bretton Woods system to take into account third world grievances, or else transforming the rest of the postwar
      system of international organizations that deal with economic matters in such a way that NIEO issues cannot be
      raised.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      This implies that the third world and its NIEO ideology will be a factor in international politics for some time
      to come. That makes it particularly important to point out the difference between the third world as an
      international actor and something that that international actor is not, a direct representative of the collective
      consciousness of all the people in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Nothing like "third worldism"
      exists as powerfully as the nationalism that can be found in almost any nation. No third world ideology
      influences the mass of people within the third world the way the NIEO ideology influences third world elites
      within international economic organizations. Deutsch's criteria can help illustrate the difference.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Probably most people throughout Asia, Africa, and Latin America have been exposed to the NIEO ideology,
      Especially in the late seventies, government-sponsored radio throughout the third world constantly discussed the
      NIEO program. (<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0386" id="bck_fn0386">16</a>) But otherwise, few people in the
      third world had a source of memories about the third world as a whole. To a certain extent popular music in the
      south Atlantic basin -- Latin America, Africa, and the Caribbean -- records and retells third world rather than
      regional or national themes. And Islamic revival <a id="page_170"></a>movements from Africa east to the Pacific
      tell and retell a history of a single struggle across much of the third world. Yet neither locus of popular
      transnational memory within the third world encompasses all regions and can be consulted by everyone.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Third world officials who want to remember third world goals and the lessons of past attempts to achieve them can
      consult books, U.N. documents, or the memory of colleagues. Most people only have access to what they and those
      near them remember of government broadcasts. And since the international forums where third world problems are
      discussed provide so few opportunities for popular input — especially for people who are poor and distant — few
      people in the third world have any good reason to spend time trying to learn about changing third world
      interests, let alone about changing attempts to achieve them.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Moreover, those in the third world outside government who do take the time to learn face impediments to sharing
      knowledge. They cannot transform the third world "consciousness" with what they learn. No systems of
      translators, frequent meetings, or standard procedures exist to let poor people in one part of the third world
      share their views with poor people in another. In most countries no such systems exist even to allow the poor to
      share their views with government officials.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The third world as an international actor, then, is based on a coalition among elites, and the NIEO ideology is
      an elite ideology. The possible set of those who could actually have affected the way the ideology emerged and,
      thus, whose interests are likely to be apprehended by it, is limited to those people within the third world who
      have access to at least some of the other factors which contribute to the alliance's autonomy — the southern
      intellectual community and the resources and meetings of international economic organizations.
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">National Interests and the NIEO Ideology</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      Third world interests generated by the global system — the creation, operation, and breakdown of the Bretton
      Woods system -- explain most of the history of NIEO ideology. The Bretton Woods system appeared to thwart
      development goals all third world governments shared. However, that systemic explanation does not tell us why
      third world governments tended to share some goals in the first place. To do that requires going below the level
      of the international system and identifying the domestic interests to which third world governments responded.
      Even if the southern states' similar goals have a "global" source, we can assume that each
      individual third world government adopted its goals in response to domestic pressures.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The goals of a government's foreign policy which <a id="page_171"></a>respond to domestic pressure are
      usually called the "national interest." Wentworth Ofuatey-Kodjoe argues that the most straightforward
      operational definition of a country's "national interest" would have researchers find out which
      people foreign policy makers think of as the "nation" when they make foreign policy, and then find out
      what that group considers to be its interests. Empirically, a country's national interest usually is the
      self-defined interests of those who keep the government in power.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0387" id="bck_fn0387">17</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      In most third world countries the governing coalition's interests are expressed in a national development
      plan. Part of the strength of the NIEO ideology, of course, is that can justify almost any national development
      plan. The only constants across national development plans that NIEO ideology seems to demand are some
      affirmation of the desirability of national cultural autonomy (the new internationalism) and some relatively
      central position for industrial development. These, in fact, are constants across third world development
      plans.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0388" id="bck_fn0388">18</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Superficially, these two constant elements seem to appeal to conflicting domestic interests. Affirmation of the
      need for industrial development appears to posit development away from rural areas where farmers — the majority
      of people in most third world countries — live, and where "traditional" elites base their power on
      indigenous customs of land ownership and labor contract. Affirmations of cultural autonomy, on the other hand,
      appear designed to strengthen the "traditional" elites' power bases and focus development on the
      countryside.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0389" id="bck_fn0389">19</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Yet third world cultural nationalist development ideologies rarely focus on the countryside. Instead of
      strengthening customary elites the ideologies often weaken them at the expense of central government which acts
      as the sole definer of the national culture. Even if ideologies of national cultural autonomy were created by
      people who did not even covertly desire to strengthen the power of the state, they invariably serve that function
      because the government uses its ability to define the national cultural as a means to reward allies and exclude
      opponents.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0390" id="bck_fn0390">20</a>) In the process, the government need never
      contradict the interests of the governing coalition based in urban areas and interested in industrialization
      whether that coalition be centered on local or foreign entrepreneurs, industrial workers, merchants, petty wage
      earners, or even the unemployed.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      More rarely, a government can pursue both an overt interest in industrial development and a covert interest in
      strengthening the state without even being based on a coalition centered in urban areas. As long as its coalition
      accepts that industrial development is a key to increasing aggregate wealth and that the coalition will gain the
      benefits of that development, perhaps through <a id="page_172"></a>the government's redistributive policies,
      the core of the governing coalition can be any sector, urban or rural. The key is the combination of the two
      interests served by constants across all the development doctrines the NIEO ideology justifies: industrial
      development and strengthening the state.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Immanuel Wallerstein argues that unless a region is "invited" to develop by international investors,
      the only other normal path to the "core" of the world economy requires both industrialization and
      strengthening the state. He even argues that to follow the least likely to succeed of the three available paths
      is to honestly pursue self-reliant development.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0391" id="bck_fn0391">21</a>) For
      governments that do that, affirmations of cultural nationalism need not become simply a means to strengthen the
      state.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Wallerstein imbeds his view within a complex theory of the development of the world economy, but his whole theory
      need not be accepted to accept the centrality of these two goals. Even if development is taken to mean simply
      increasing wealth, the labor savings that come from the introduction of industrial techniques make that possible.
      And, as Ε. B. Ayal argues, industrialization no longer can be carried out solely in the interests of individual
      entrepreneurs. Demands for redistribution of new wealth are too all pervasive. Only very rare third world
      governments, even those governing the most dualistic society with the widest income disparities, can govern
      without the occasional backing of at least some of the nation's poorest sectors. Development in modern states
      has to be something of a collectivist process. And the cultural nationalist doctrines which the NIEO ideology
      justifies help the state create the specific form of collectivism its own supporters demand.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0392" id="bck_fn0392">22</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Thus, an excursion into domestic interests underlying the NIEO ideology takes us back to the international
      system, not to the Bretton Woods system, but to the older "world economy" characterized by development
      in some regions and underdevelopment in others. The development goals the NIEO ideology supports may be
      politically astute throughout the third world. Unless third world governments choose to rely on "development
      by invitation," they may well have interests in industrialization and strengthening the state no matter what
      specific coalition of social forces maintains the government in power.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      There are other ways to explain those domestic interests shared by third world governments and expressed by the
      NIEO ideology. Some critics of the new order argue that third world governments offer it to their domestic
      supporters in lieu of development. Such arguments run parallel to John Nellis's convincing assessment of the
      functions of Tanzania's domestic ideology; it lets rural Tanzaniane participate in a social experiment they
      can tell is of world historical significance even though it <a id="page_173"></a>has little chance of success.
      The governing elite in Tanzania, Nellis argues, has used the opportunity created by the way the ideology reduced
      material demands to secure a more prominant position.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0393" id="bck_fn0393">23</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Certainly the NIEO ideology helps strengthen the state and its functionaries, just as did the domestic ideology
      that Nellis studied. But the words of the NIEO ideology would not be as readily acceptable in lieu of real
      development as the Tanzanian development doctrine is. The NIEO ideology, even when publicly promulgated over
      government radio, can offer very few people a sense of participation in something historically important. It
      invites no public participation. It does not require third world publics to uproot villages, change habits of
      production, or even to continue to listen to the radio. Perhaps the NIEO ideology offered some third world
      diplomats at international conferences a sense of participation in world historical changes in lieu of the sense
      of competence that might come from successfully negotiating north-south agreements. That trade off might have
      been in the interests of central governments opposed to the kind of north-south agreements that have actually
      been possible up to now. But the same process could not work to quell the demands of any other group within a
      third world country in the same way, simply because the NIEO ideology does not offer participation to anyone
      else.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Of course, it could be that the NIEO ideology's only real function within a third world country is to deflect
      criticism from the government, to, as Caribbean dependency theorist Havelock Brewster puts it, blame the
      developed countries for the third world government's inherent inability to control the economy. Certainly, in
      an extremely facile sense, that is true. Adherents to the NIEO ideology do blame the international system for
      their inability to set and meet national development goals, just as Brewster says.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0394" id="bck_fn0394">24</a>) But the persistence and the ubiquity of the new order ideology throughout the
      third world argue against explaining it solely as a tool to deflect domestic criticism. It could not be used
      successfully for that purpose for long. As Ofuatey-Kodjoe says, in a world of ubiquitous dependence third world
      citizens judge their governments on the basis of what they have done with the cards the international system
      deals them; a Ghanaian is less interested in the dependence both Ghana and the Ivory Coast equally suffer than in
      the reasons why the Ivorian government seems to have done better than any Ghanaian government has.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0395" id="bck_fn0395">25</a>) To believe that the NIEO ideology has existed for nearly
      forty years merely as a tool to deflect domestic criticism from third world governments is to have little faith
      in the intelligence either of third world officials or of third world citizens.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Having some faith in both, I doubt that attempts to <a id="page_174"></a>deflect domestic criticism can explain
      everything in the NIEO ideology, or even those few common elements in all third world development doctrines that
      are not explained by the NIEO ideology's history as a reaction to Bretton Woods. Instead, I suspect the
      desire for industrial development and the desire to strengthen the state appear to have been almost universal
      lessons of mid-twentieth century domestic politics throughout the south. If we could compare the process of
      government formation in state after state -- sequences of parties formed by or forming coalitions of domestic
      social forces, coming to power and then remaining, or perhaps reorganizing or falling -- we should expect to find
      that any stable government, no matter what groups make up its governing coalition, would be one that wanted these
      things that the NIEO ideology supports. Unfortunately, investigation of that hypothesis has to await further
      research.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0397" id="bck_fn0397">27</a>)
    </div>
<h3 class="h"><span class="underline">The Personal Experience of Third World Officials</span></h3>
<div class="text_indent">
      Given that no one has done research to determine if the new order ideology responds to third world domestic
      concerns other than the typical government's desire to deflect public criticism, I may have passed over that
      hypothesis too quickly. The argument really is less about pressures on third world governments from domestic
      politics than it is one about common personal characteristics of third world leaders, in this case, a common
      desire to deflect criticism rather than to accept it and respond to it directly. I now turn to personal
      characteristics new order advocates may have in common. As I argued above, given the global focus of the NIEO
      ideology, we should begin to look for its explanation at more inclusive levels of analysis. Little of the
      ideology's history remains to be explained below the level of the world system. What remains can be explained
      as the coordination of domestic interests, which have a systemic source as well. The following summary of some of
      the personal concerns that many third world advocates of the NIEO share simply reinforces this explanation of the
      nature and rise of the NIEO ideology.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The desire to deflect popular criticism of failed development policies may, indeed, be a trait third world
      advocates of the new order share. It may be one way of coping with the peculiar position in world society in
      which they find themselves, the position mentioned in both quotations at the head of this chapter, political and
      economic leaders recognize they are part of a global elite, yet have good reason to consider themselves victims
      within global society. They identify with the vast majority of people around the world who are the most
      victimized by the present structure of global society, yet third world political and economic leaders recognize
      themselves as contributing to the victimization of the <a id="page_175"></a>least advantaged. Before suggesting
      how this peculiar position might generate beliefs and actions which could influence the NIEO ideology, let me
      justify the way I characterized it.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      That third world economic and political leaders are part of a global elite should not be controversial. The
      dualism within most third world economies assures that the advantages of the most advantaged people in the south
      are similar to those of most advantaged people in the north. Third world leaders have had access to the same
      education that leaders of wealthy states have. Economists meeting to discuss north-south matters may represent
      all the countries of the world, but they are likely to represent only the most prestigious handful of the
      world's universities.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0397">27</a>) And, to a certain extent, to understand
      the personal dynamics of the General Assembly meeting on economic matters involves understanding the concerns of
      one of the most privileged classes in the city at the center of the world economy, New York.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      That third world economic and political leaders are victims might be less apparent. But the victimization of the
      most frequent promoters of the NIEO ideology, the representatives of third world governments at international
      economic meetings, can be demonstrated easily. C. Clyde Ferguson, an American representative at the United
      Nations during the Carter years, points out that the vast majority of representatives at any north-south
      conference will have grown up in colonial societies. "Some even have vivid memories of signs — 'No
      Natives, No Dogs.'"(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0398" id="bck_fn0398">28</a>) Even many of those who
      grew up in independent states lived through periods when their nation was wracked by military intervantions from
      countries in the north. And despite the very similar education that all the people who take part in economic
      debates within international organizations have, all third world representatives have had to suffer the typical
      condescension of their colleagues from wealthy nations. As Sidney Weintraub noted even during the cooperative
      early sixties, northern delegates to global economic conferences have trouble resisting their desire to lecture
      those who appear to have so much to learn about development.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0399" id="bck_fn0399">29</a>) Ferguson adds that most experienced diplomats recognize that a peculiar sort of
      racism creates tension underneath even the most cooperative north-south meetings on economic matters.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0400" id="bck_fn0400">30</a>) The coincidence that most Group of 77 states are populated
      by nonwhites or dark skinned Caucasians lets northerners, including some sympathetic to the third world, express
      their normal condescension as racism.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      The victimization that third world economic and political leaders have suffered and continue to suffer assures
      that most will identify with the more completely victimized majority within their own country. In fact, those
      scholars who argue that third world elite concerns <a id="page_176"></a>with national cultural autonomy
      inadvertently lead to a highly functional strengthening of the state, also argue that in case after case
      throughout the third world the elite's initial concern with national cultural autonomy came from an attempt
      to identify with the country's least advantaged. That identification, in turn, provided a partial
      psychological resolution of the conflict created by being both a member of the world's colonial or
      neocolonial elite and its victim.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0401" id="bck_fn0401">31</a>) There is no reason
      to believe that new members of any third world nation's elite cannot find the same reasons for identifying,
      in part, with the least advantaged and thus, not incidentally, come to reinforce one of the key principles of the
      new order ideology.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Unfortunately for themselves, many people who govern third world states cannot retain an unambiguous personal
      identification with their country's least advantaged. Some officials consciously and actively take part in
      the victimization of the majority in order to maintain their dominant position. Others, perhaps including the
      Tanzanian officials whose behavior Nellis explains so well, find that the act of governing condemns them to
      victimize their fellow citizens (at least at times) with taxes, nonremunerative production prices, high consumer
      prices, or exclusions from social services that others receive.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Those who try to cope with this contradiction between identifying with the most victimized yet consciously
      contributing to their victimization might decide to deflect popular criticism of their inability to better
      control the economy by pointing to the international system as the source of the problem and demanding the NIEO
      as its solution. Equally, says critic of Caribbean dependency theory G. E. Cumper, they might decide to become
      academic dependency theorists, retain their position in the global social elite, continue criticizing the world
      economy, yet also be able to criticize officials of third world governments for their "contradictory"
      and "self-serving" views.(<a href="Ch06.xhtml#fn0402" id="bck_fn0402">32</a>)
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Parenthetically, even though either of these ideological solutions would be "self-serving" in the sense
      that it would mean adopting beliefs in order to cope with a personal dilemma without first testing to see if the
      beliefs are valid, there is no reason why beliefs adopted in that way have to be invalid. That is a separate
      question. I indirectly addressed it in this book whenever I illustrated that NIEO advocates look for explanations
      of new problems only among those not excluded by the ideological constraint of their prior consensus.
      Nonetheless, for the purposes of this book, the influence of personal experiences on the NIEO ideology has
      significance not as a means to test the ideology's analysis, but as a means to test my own thesis about the
      ideology's origin.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
<a id="page_177"></a>The test cannot be completely conclusive because the personal interests that third world
      NIEO advocates have because of their position in international society suggest nothing new. parts of the new
      order ideology appear overdetermined. Or, to put it more precisely, third world NIEO advocates may have been able
      to resolve personal dilemmas as well as solve problems created by systemic forces when they adopted two of the
      key characteristics of the NIEO ideology, its concern for aiding national cultural autonomy and its focus on
      systemic rather than domestic impediments to industrial development.
    </div>
<div class="text_indent">
      Personal, state, and global interests combine to create the NIEO ideology. The ideology's content and origin
      are best understood first as a reaction to the positions of third world states both within the Bretton Woods
      system of institutions managing the global economy since the second world war and within the older, more
      inclusive world economy as a whole. That is why the ideology's history fits so easily within the frameworks
      provided by Andrew Scott's theory of the rise and fall of international management regimes and David
      Apter's theory of how ideologies can develop when opportunities for creating a collective political identity
      exist among those who have been excluded in any political system. The NIEO ideology was created and has
      operational meaning only within the political system of intergovernmental management of the world economy first
      created after the second world war. The ideology contributes to the identity of a political actor, the third
      world, which, even though it acts only within a limited arena, is likely to be with us as long as the present
      system of intergovernmental management of the world economy exists. The positions of Asian, African, and Latin
      American elite advocates of the NIEO ideology, both within their national societies and within world society as a
      whole, should be understood as contributing to the rise of the ideology only in one sense. By adopting the NIEO
      ideology, third world political and economic leaders can partially resolve some of the contradictory beliefs they
      hold as a result of their contradictory position as both victimizers within their own societies and victims
      within world society.
    </div>
<div class="footnote">
<h2 class="item1" id="ht0049"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0049">Notes</a></h2>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0371">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0371">(1)</a>Ibrahim Helmi Abdel Rahman, "The Most Basic Need: The Need
        to Develop Rationally," in Anthony J. Dolman and Jan van Ettinger, eds., <span class="underline">partners
        In Tomorrow</span> (New Yorks E. P. Dutton), pp. 7-8. Paul Streeten, "The New International Economic
        Order," Unpublished paper, Washington, June 7, 1979, p. 4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0372">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0372">(2)</a>ln my doctoral research I kept track of changes <a id="page_178"></a>in NIEO policy analysis by making a series of "cognitive maps," representations of
        stated causal relationships, of the "third world" position in Second Committee debates. See the
        appendix to "The Emergence of the New International Economic Order Ideology," unpublished
        dissertation, Dept. of Political Science, Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1980.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0373">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0373">(3)</a>The Group of 77 tends to treat the Charter of Economic Rights
        and Duties of States as international legislation enacted in 1974. It applies the duty of restitution to those
        states continuing "colonialism" after the charter was adopted. Beginning in 1977 the group has
        charged Israel and South Africa with duties of restitution under this principle, as reported in Ervin Laszlo et
        al., <span class="underline">The Objectives of the New International Economic Order</span> (New York: Pergamon,
        1978 ), pp. 169-70. The previous year the nonaligned countries reiterated their support of this circumscribed
        version of the restitution ethic:
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit">
        The international community is urged to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of restitution and full
        compensation for damages for the exploitation and depletion and all damages to the natural and other resources
        of all states, territories, and peoples subjected to foreign aggression and occupation, alien and colonial
        domination, social discrimination, and apartheid. Then, emphasizing that the overarching duty under the NIEO
        was to be the permanent duty of all states to each other, not the historical duty of the exploiter to the
        exploited, the nonaligned states added:
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit">
        It is, in addition, the duty of all states to extend assistance to these countries, territories, and peoples.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit">
        Quoted in Laszlo, p. 171·
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0374">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0374">(4)</a>William R. Cline, "A Quantitative Assessment of the Policy
        Alternatives in the NIEO Negotiations," in <span class="underline">Ρolicy Alternatives for a New
        International Economic Order</span> (New York: Praeger, 1979), p. 52. Cline uses this evidence to justify the
        typical northern criticism of the NIEO ideology in the late seventies. The fact that the new order program will
        not work means that more emphasis must be placed on the ". . . growth and equity performances of the
        domestic economies of the developing countries." The evidence suggests to him that the developing
        countries should quit carping about international impediments to development, search for explanations of their
        lack of development in domestic policies, and adopt basic needs criteria as their central goal. Once
        Cline's evidence is accepted, it would be just <a id="page_179"></a>as logical to redouble efforts to find
        new intergovernmental policy proposals that would be more effective than those that are now part of the NIEO
        doctrine. The ideological constraint of the south's prior agreement that there is a systemic source of the
        major development problems common throughout the third world assures that Cline's evidence will convince
        NIEO supporters of this alternative to the conclusion he hopes they will reach.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0375">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0375">(5)</a>William Loehr and John p. Powelson, <span class="underline">Threat, to Development: The pitfalls of the NIEO</span> (Boulder: Westview Press" 1983).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0376">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0376">(6)</a>Clifford Geertz, "Ideology as a Cultural System," in
        David E. Apter, ed., <span class="underline">Ideology and Discontent</span> (New York: Free Press, 1964), p.
        61.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0377">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0377">(7)</a>Daniel Patrick Moynihan, "The united States in
        Opposition," <span class="underline">Commentary</span> 59 (Mar. 1975): 31-4.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0378">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0378">(8)</a>Fred Block, <span class="underline">The Origins of
        International Economic Disorder</span> (Berkeley: Univ. of Calif. Press, 1977), ppT 223-24.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0379">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0379">(9)</a>John Rawls, <span class="underline">A Theory of Justice</span>
        (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1971).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0380">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0380">(10)</a>As Charles R. Beitz argues in <span class="underline">Political Theory and International Relations</span> (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1979), pp.
        125-76·
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0381">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0381">(11)</a>This is the approach taken by Robert W. Tucker in his
        <span class="underline">The Inequality of Nations</span> (New York: Basic Books, 1977).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0382">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0382">(12)</a>Such arguments are made in Edward T. Hall, <span class="underline">Beyond Culture</span> (Garden City: Doubleday, 1977) and Hannah Arendt, <span class="underline">Totalitarianism</span> (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1968). In conversation, Arendt's biographer,
        Elizabeth Young-Βruehl, informed me that Arendt used "internationalism" and
        "cosmopolitanism" to make the same distinction Sukarno made except that Arendt defined each concept
        the way Sukarno defined the other.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0383">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0383">(13)</a>Hall's argument is the most compelling of the three.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0384">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0384">(14)</a>The usual way involves assuming that third world governments
        share no systemic interests, that no reality, even the reality of a common reaction to the Bretton Woods
        system, underlies the notion of a "third world." Analysts who make that assumption are forced to look
        for coincidences of domestic or personal interests to explain the NIEO ideology; see Craig Murphy, "What
        the Third World Wants: An'interpretation of the Development and Meaning of the New International Economic
        Order Ideology," <span class="underline">International Studies Quarterly</span> 27 (Mar. 1983): 54-59,
        70-72.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0385">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0385">(15)</a>Karl W. Deutsch, <span class="underline">Nationalism and
        Social Communication: An Inquiry Into the Foundation of Nationality</span>, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: MIT Press,
        1966), pp. 166-70.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0386">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0386">(16)</a>I make this assertion based on frequent but not <a id="page_180"></a>systematic listening to short wave broadcasts.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0387">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0387">(17)</a>Wentworth Ofuatey-Kodjoe, "A Model of Foreign Policy
        Decision Making in Africa," unpublished paper, Queens College, City Univ. of New York, p. 3.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0388">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0388">(18)</a>Even countries that emphasize rural development want to apply
        industrial technologies to the countryside, both labor saving devices and the products of industry such as
        chemical fertilizers. Consequently, they devote significant resources to industrial development.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0389">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0389">(19)</a>E. B. Ayal, "Nationalist Ideology and Economic
        Development" <span class="underline">Human Organization</span> 25 (Fall 1966): 236. Boris Erasov,
        "Cultural Personality in the Ideologies of the Third World," <span class="underline">Diogenes</span>
        78 (Summer 1972): 126·
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0390">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0390">(20)</a>Ayal, p. 236; Erasov, pp. 132-35.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0391">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0391">(21)</a>Immanuel Wallerstein, "Dependence in an Interdependent
        World: The Limited Possibilities of Transformation Within the Capitalist World-Economy," in The Capitalist
        World-Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1979), pp. 66-94.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0392">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0392">(22)</a>Ayal, p. 233.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0393">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0393">(23)</a>John R. Nellis, A Theory of Ideology (London: Oxford Univ.
        Press, 1972).
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0394">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0394">(24)</a>Havelock Brewster, "Economic Dependence: A Quantitative
        Interpretation," Social and Economic Studies 22 (Mar. 1973): 90-95.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0395">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0395">(25)</a>Ofuatey-Kodjoe, p. 11.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit">
        (26)I have tried to begin such research through a close study of three African cases (Ghana, Tanzania, and
        Guinea-Bissau) and a survey of information on the continent's other states, as reported in "Society,
        Ideology, and Foreign Policy in Africa," paper presented at the annual meeting of the Canadian African
        Studies Association, Toronto, May 1982.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0397">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0397">(27)</a>The best summary of this pattern in world society suggested by
        both Streeten and Abdel Rahman remains Johan Galtung's "A Structural Theory of imperialism,"
        <span class="underline">Journal of Peace Research</span> 8, no. 2 (1971): 81-18; also see his "Ά
        Structural Theory of Imperialism' -- Ten Years Later," <span class="underline">Millenium</span> 9
        (Winter 1980-81): 183-96.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0398">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0398">(28)</a>C. Clyde Ferguson, "The New International Economic
        Order," in David M. Kay, ed., <span class="underline">The Changing United Nations</span> (New York:
        Academy of political Science, 1978), p. 152.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0399">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0399">(29)</a>Sidney Weintraub, "After the U.N. Trade Conference:
        Lessons and Portents," <span class="underline">Foreign Affairs</span> 47 (Oct. 1964): 50.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0400">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0400">(30)</a>Ferguson, p. 154.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0401">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0401">(31)</a>Ayal, passim; Erasov, p. 126.
      </div>
<div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0402">
<a href="Ch06.xhtml#bck_fn0402">(32)</a>G. E. Cumper, "Dependence, Development, and the Sociology
        of Economic Thought," <span class="underline">Social and Economic Studies</span> 23 (Sept. 1974): 465-82.
      </div>
</div>

<br class="end-page"/></div>