<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="frontMatterPage" id="copy">
<p class="chapterTitle1"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="copyright1">ISBN 978-1-349-95075-1      ISBN 978-1-349-95076-8    (eBook)</p>
<p class="copyright1">DOI 10.1057/978-1-349-95076-8</p>
<p class="copyright2">Library of Congress Control Number: 2016958910</p>
<p class="copyright2">© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
<br/>The author(s) has/have asserted their right(s) to be identified as the author(s) of this work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
<br/>This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
<br/>The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
<br/>The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made.</p>
<p class="copyright2">Printed on acid-free paper</p>
<p class="copyright2">This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature
<br/>The registered company is Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
<br/>The registered company address is: The Campus, 4 Crinan Street, London, N1 9XW, United Kingdom</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>