<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="frontMatterPage" id="ack">
<p class="chapterTitle1">Acknowledgements</p>
<p class="NoIndent">This project began to take shape when I was preparing the manuscript for my own volume, <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span>, published by Palgrave in 2000. Therefore, I first need to thank all those who got me interested in Carr and those who then suggested that we reissue one of his great classics with an introduction and additional material that would not only help a new generation of students understand Carr more readily, but also explain how he came to write <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in the first place, and why it exercised the influence it did – and still does. That great stalwart of the British intellectual scene, Bernard Crick, once admitted that of all the books he had ever read – and Bernard had read quite a few – it was Carr’s <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> that had possibly influenced him most. Many others would no doubt say the same thing, including Tim Farmiloe, who worked for Macmillan for many years. Though Tim was too young to publish <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> (that privilege was left to the future Prime Minister Harold Macmillan), he did work closely with Carr much later, and as a result encouraged me to get involved in my first venture into Carrdom. I would also like to thank Tim’s successor, Josie Dixon, as well as Alison Howson, who first suggested that we reissue the volume with flags flying and drum beating, and a painting by Lowry on the cover to set the whole thing off.</p>
<p class="para">Robert Machesney, who is the keeper of the archives at the Macmillan HQ in Basingstoke, deserves special mention too, not only for the wonderful lunch he provided on my visit there, but for making available to me the Carr correspondence with his favourite publishing house. The letters are worth reading for all sorts of reasons, not the least of which are the light they throw on Carr’s determination as a successful author to negotiate such excellent terms! I would also like to express my gratitude to the librarians in the Special Collection in The University of Birmingham where the Carr Papers are housed, and which have been added to enormously since 2001 with such documents as the Carr diaries, as well as several previously unavailable letters. I would also like to thank Caroline Ellerby for working so efficiently and helping me get all the material ready for the book.</p>
<p class="para">Moving closer to home, my sincerest gratitude must be extended to my good colleague Professor Ian Clark in the Department of International Politics at the University of Wales, Aberystwyth. As the proud owner of one of the few first editions of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> it was Ian who made it possible for me to make a serious comparison of the original with the later editions of the book, thus hopefully clearing up once and for all any misunderstandings regarding some of the more controversial deletions Carr made when working on the book in the summer and autumn of 1945 before its appearance in 1946. Directly and indirectly, many other colleagues have helped too, but I would like to say a very special word of thanks to several in the ‘home of the discipline’ at ‘Aber’, including Ken Booth, the first holder of the E. H. Carr Chair in International Politics, Tim Dunne, who is more than just ‘the Boswell of the English school’, Richard Wynn Jones, who still has his doubts about Carr on the national question, Andrew Linklater, a worthy successor to Carr as Woodrow Wilson Professor, Brian Schmidt for raising important questions about the ‘first great debate’, Nick Wheeler for his sheer enthusiasm and who is at last getting the recognition he deserves, Mike Williams for sharing his insights about Morgenthau, Steve Smith for his continued friendship and support, and Colin Wight for his immaculate taste in critical realism and French reds. Gratitude must also be extended to Barry Buzan, Bob Cox, Robert Gilpin and Fred Halliday for supporting the book with their warm words of praise. Thanks as well go to Stefano Guzzini, Charles Jones and Peter Wilson for their many insights into Carr. I would also like to mention the three previous Chairs of the British International Studies Association – Chris Brown, Christopher Hill and Richard Little – for being so supportive during my term of editorship of the Association’s journal, the <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, between 1998 and 2001. In many ways my work for the <span class="italic">Review</span> and my involvement with Carr seem to have been indistinguishable these last four years.</p>
<p class="para">Finally, a very special mention for my wife Fiona and my four children, Annaliese, Ben, Dan and Nell, for always being there.</p>
<p class="paraRight"><span class="italic">Michael Cox</span></p>
<p class="paraRight"><span class="italic">Aberystwyth</span></p>
<p class="paraRight"><span class="italic">Wales</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent"><span class="italic">June 2001</span></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>