<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="frontMatterPage" id="guide1">
<p class="chapterTitle1">A Guide to the Secondary Literature on E. H. Carr</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The appearance of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in late 1939 witnessed the start of a long and often acrimonious debate about the book – one that continues today and seems to show no sign of abating. The starting point for an understanding of how Carr was initially read and received has to be the two important essays by Peter Wilson, ‘The Myth of the First Great Debate’, in Tim Dunne, Michael Cox and Ken Booth (eds), <span class="italic">The Eighty Years’ Crisis: International Relations 1919–1939</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), and ‘Carr and his Early Critics: Responses to <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, 1939–1946’, in Michael Cox (ed.), <span class="italic">E. H. Carr: a Critical Appraisal</span> (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2000). Both books also contain much material on Carr himself. The various contributors in the former publication attempt to deploy some of Carr’s main categories to see whether or not they have much value for the study of the modern world system – and generally conclude that they do. The second study includes 15 essays that discuss the various facets of Carr’s contribution to intellectual life, with a number – those by Brian Porter, Tim Dunne, Andrew Linklater, Paul Rich, Randall Germain and Fred Halliday – dealing with Carr’s more specific contribution to international relations. The latter also contains the indispensable autobiographical note by Carr himself. Written only a couple of years before his own death in 1982, Carr explains 40 years after the first appearance of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> that it was ‘not exactly a Marxist work’ but was nonetheless ‘strongly impregnated with Marxist ways of thinking, applied to international affairs’. He also confessed that he was a ‘bit ashamed’ of its ‘harsh realism’, and by way of compensation went on in 1940 and 1941 to write what he called ‘the highly utopian <span class="italic">Conditions of Peace</span> – a sort of liberal Utopia mixed with a little socialism but very little Marxism’. For essential background on how and why Carr came to write <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> (and a lot more besides), see Charles Jones’ somewhat oddly titled, but very useful study <span class="italic">E. H. Carr and International Relations: a Duty to Lie</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), which examines Carr’s ideas on world affairs between 1936 and 1946. Rather strangely titled too is the equally impressive biography of Carr written by Jonathan Haslam (a former student but not an acolyte of Carr), <span class="italic">The Vices of Integrity: E. H. Carr, 1892–1982</span> (London: Verso, 1999). Two other works should also be consulted, more for what they have to say about the various ‘idealists’ whom Carr attacked than for Carr himself. They are David Long and Peter Wilson (eds), <span class="italic">Thinkers of The Twenty Years’ Crisis: Inter-War Idealism Reassessed</span> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995) and Lucian Ashworth, <span class="italic">Creating International Studies</span> (London: Ashgate, 1998).</p>
<p class="para">As Wilson shows, Carr’s study provoked something close to outrage among those whom he had either attacked directly or whose ideas he had disparaged. A number felt compelled to reply in kind to what they saw as a mischievous but potentially influential volume with little moral compass, and which came all too close, in their view, of suggesting that high ideas about peace, order and international law were little more than the ideologies of the powerful states seeking to defend the status quo against the ‘have-not states’ such as Nazi Germany. Significantly, one of the more significant contributions came from the noted liberal Norman Angell in his <span class="italic">Why Freedom Matters</span> (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1940). Leonard Woolf also replied in his <span class="italic">The War for Peace</span> (London: Routledge, 1940) and ‘Utopia and Reality’, <span class="italic">Political Quarterly</span>, Vol. 11, No. 2, April–June 1940, as did Susan Stebbing in <span class="italic">Ideals and Illusions</span> (London: Watts and Co., 1941). His predecessor at Aberystwyth and first holder of the Woodrow Wilson Chair, Alfred Zimmern, also criticized Carr in ‘A Realist in Search of Utopia’, <span class="italic">Spectator</span>, 24 November 1939; so too did R. W. Seton-Watson in ‘Politics and Power’, <span class="italic">Listener</span>, 7 December 1939. See though the more positive reviews by two American writers, W. P. Maddox in <span class="italic">American Political Science Review</span>, Vol. 34, No. 3, 1940, pp. 587–8, and Crane Brinton, ‘Power and Morality in Foreign Policies’, <span class="italic">Saturday Review</span>, 17 February 1940. However, it was left to the British socialist Richard Crossman to make what many thought was the most damaging political point of all: that in his rush to demystify power in international relations, Carr ended up writing an apologia for the foreign policy of Germany in the late 1930s; see his ‘The Illusions of Power’, <span class="italic">New Statesman</span>, Vol. 28, No. 475, 25 November 1940, pp. 761–2. An anonymous reviewer of the book probably summed up the general view of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> that it was as ‘profound’ as it was ‘provocative’ (<span class="italic">Times Literary Supplement</span>, 11 November 1939, p. 65).</p>
<p class="para">In spite of, or perhaps even because of the various attacks on the book, it did remarkably well. The first edition of 1939 was reprinted three times in 1940, and a new (and controversially modified) edition came out in 1946. This in turn was reprinted on 12 occasions until 1978, before the reissue of the book in 1981. Carr thus had many good reasons – somewhere close to 50,000 in fact – to be pleased by a volume that not only sold well at home but also in the US. Indeed, Carr himself was well aware of the importance of the American market, and on at least two occasions in 1948 wrote to his publishers, Macmillan, urging them to keep the US market well stocked. This was in part because the book, he found out, was ‘now being fairly widely used as a textbook’, and also because of what he discovered at first hand to be the growth of a new discipline in American universities known as international relations! ‘The study of the subject is increasing by leaps and bounds’ and so ‘the chances of sales are good’, he noted. Hence, the ‘more’ copies of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> that Macmillan could ‘supply America at present, the more are likely to be sold here’.</p>
<p class="para">No doubt sales were much helped by an early assessment penned by one of the more senior figures in the new field of American international relations: Hans J. Morgenthau. Writing the first review article in the very first edition of the newly established journal <span class="italic">World Politics</span>, Morgenthau readily conceded the importance of the book and the sharp intellect of the man who had written it. Carr’s contribution to political thought, he agreed, was ‘of the first order’. Yet Carr in his view had failed to temper his own form of realism with a clear statement of moral purpose; consequently, he had become what Morgenthau called ‘a Machiavelli without <span class="italic">virtu</span>’, that is, someone who had no ‘transcendent point of view from which to survey the political scene and to appraise the phenomenon of power’; see Hans J. Morgenthau, ‘The Political Science of E. H. Carr’, <span class="italic">World Politics</span>, Vol. 1, No. 1, October 1948, pp. 127–34. The influential Morgenthau piece was later reprinted in a shortened form, and with a different, rather more pungent title – ‘The Surrender to the Immanence of Power: E. H. Carr’ – appearing in his edited collection <span class="italic">Dilemmas of Politics</span> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), pp. 350–7. For a later criticism of Carr, which takes up the issue of power and morality (and a good deal more), it is also useful to look at the quite lengthy essay by the American conservative academic Whittle Johnson, ‘E. H. Carr’s Theory of International Relations: A Critique’, <span class="italic">Journal of Politics</span>, Vol. 29, 1967, pp. 861–84.</p>
<p class="para">Carr, however, had more friends than he did enemies in the US, and one of the more enthusiastic was Kenneth Thompson, a prolific writer and editor, and a great admirer of the classical tradition of realism, the finest proponents of which in his view included Carr, Reinhold Niebuhr, Hans J. Morgenthau, Walter Lippmann and George F. Kennan. For a brief guide see in particular Kenneth Thompson, <span class="italic">Political Realism and the Crisis of World Politics</span> (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1960), and his edited collection <span class="italic">Masters of International Thought: Major Twentieth Century Theorists and the World Crisis</span> (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1980). Carr’s other great American admirer was of course Robert Gilpin, whose name was to become closely associated with the theory of hegemonic stability in the 1970s. Significantly, Gilpin derived this highly influential notion from his reading of Carr’s <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, and then adapted it to international political economy. As he later admitted:</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="extract1">My interest in the relationship between the structure of the international political system and the nature of the international economy was first aroused by my reading of E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. In this classic study of the collapse of the open world economy at the outbreak of World War I and the subsequent inability of a weakened Great Britain to re-create a liberal international economy after the war, Carr demonstrated that a liberal world economy must rest on a dominant liberal power.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="paraRight">(Cited in Robert Gilpin, <span class="italic">Global Political Economy: Understanding the International Economic Order</span> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), p. 100)</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent">In this context see Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981) and <span class="italic">The Political Economy of International Relations</span> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987).</p>
<p class="para">Given his canonical status in the US as one of the high priests of classical realism, it is not surprising that a good deal was to be written about Carr’s contribution to international relations theory. Useful starting points are: William C. Olsen, ‘The Growth of the Discipline’, in Brian Porter (ed.), <span class="italic">The Aberystwyth Papers, 1919–1969</span> (London: Oxford University Press, 1972), pp. 3–29; Roger Morgan, ‘E. H. Carr and the Study of International Relations’, in C. Abramsky (ed.), <span class="italic">Essays in Honour of E. H. Carr</span> (London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1974), pp. 171–82; and W. T. R. Fox, ‘E. H. Carr and Political Realism’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 11, 1985, pp. 1–16. Fox is one of the many to have commented negatively on what he thinks are the important differences between the 1939 and 1946 editions of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. The critical chapter in Michael Joseph Smith’s book, ‘E. H. Carr: Realism as Relativism’, in his <span class="italic">Realist Thought from Weber to Kissinger</span> (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1986), pp. 68–98, should also be read. Smith was one of the few Americans to refer to what he saw as some of the Marxist-influenced aspects of Carr’s thought. However, for a more favourable analysis see J. D. B. Miller, ‘E. H. Carr: The Realist’s Realist’, <span class="italic">The National Interest</span>, No. 35, Fall 1991, pp. 65–71. The title tells its own story about Miller’s reading of Carr. R.G. Kauffman’s ‘E. H. Carr, Winston Churchill, Reinhold Niebuhr and Us’, <span class="italic">Security Studies</span>, Vol. 5, 1995, pp. 322–33 is also useful.</p>
<p class="para">Ironically, while Carr was taken very seriously in the US, in the UK at least there never appeared to be the same level of engagement. No doubt his apparent indifference to the subject of international relations itself, and his known sympathy for the Russian revolution, made him something of a marginal figure in Cold War Britain. It was not insignificant, of course, that he was not invited to attend the first meeting establishing the British Committee for the Study of International Theory in 1960. Nor was it insignificant that one of the first really serious attempts to deal with <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> was by someone who did attend: Hedley Bull. Furthermore, in a powerful critique originally entitled ‘E. H. Carr and the Fifty Years’ Crisis’, but finally published in 1969 under the title ‘<span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> Thirty Years On’ (<span class="italic">International Journal</span>, Vol. 24, 1969, pp. 626–38), Bull called upon students of international relations to go beyond Carr and explore the idea that Carr rejected – ‘the idea of international society itself’ – and to use it as the starting point for a ‘new analysis’ of international relations. In the light of later discussions about Carr’s intellectual relationship to the cause of the so-called ‘English School’, this review takes on added significance, as do the various criticisms directed at Carr’s inability ‘to keep the balance, the fruitful tension between power and morality’ by that other high priest of the ‘school’, Martin Wight, in his <span class="italic">International Theory: the Three Traditions</span> (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1991), pp. x, 16–18 and 267. In the same book Wight called <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> ‘the reflection of a diseased situation in Britain in the 1930s’ (p. 267). The vexed issue of Carr’s relationship, if any, with the ‘English School’ and the concept of an ‘international society’ can be followed up in Tim Dunne’s important <span class="italic">Inventing International Society: a History of the English School</span> (London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1998). See the criticisms of Dunne’s attempts to associate Carr with the ‘school’, and disassociate Manning, by Tony Brems Knudsen, ‘Theory of Society or Society of Theorists? With Tim Dunne in the English School’, <span class="italic">Cooperation and Conflict</span>, Vol. 35, No. 2, 2000, pp. 193–203; Samuel M. Makinda, ‘International Society and Eclecticism in International Relations Theory’, ibid., pp. 205–16; and Hidemi Suganami, ‘A New Narrative, A New Subject? Tim Dunne on the “English School”’, ibid., pp. 217–26. See also Tim Dunne’s reply to critics in his ‘Watching the Wheels Go Round: Replying to the Replies’, <span class="italic">Cooperation and Conflict</span>, Vol. 36, No. 3, 2001, pp. 314–18.</p>
<p class="para">Carr, it is true, never bothered to reply to either Bull or Wight. Nonetheless, we do know from his unpublished correspondence that he had a rather low opinion of the notion of an ‘international society’. As he remarked in a letter to Stanley Hoffman in 1977, ‘no international society exists, but an open club without substantive rules’. A few years earlier he had said much the same thing in an attack on C. A. W. Manning’s book, later published under the title of <span class="italic">The Nature of International Society</span> (1962; London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1975).</p>
<p class="extract">‘My fundamental criticism’ [of his thesis about the existence of an international society], Carr wrote to the publishers even before they had decided to bring the volume out, ‘is that the international game implied by it is in fact a creation of a small and influential group in the Western world during the past 400 years and there is no reason to suppose that it will survive the decline of these groups.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">On Manning’s contribution to, and role in, international relations in Britain, see the sympathetic account provided by Hidemi Suganami, ‘C. A. W. Manning and the Study of International Politics’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 27, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 91–108.</p>
<p class="para">If Carr remained largely uninterested in international relations in Britain, not all practitioners of international relations were to remain so indifferent to him. This expressed itself from the 1970s onwards, however, not in a reaffirmation of his realism, but in a discovery of what many now said had for too long been ignored or misunderstood – namely, his critical attitude to power and those who exercised it. The first to hint at the puzzling and progressive character of Carr’s realism was probably Graham Evans in his original but unfortunately largely ignored, ‘E. H. Carr and International Relations’, <span class="italic">British Journal of International Studies</span> (after 1980 <span class="italic">The Review of International Studies</span>), Vol. 1, No. 2, 1975, pp. 77–97. The critical and historical theme was then taken up by the radical political economist Robert Cox, a very early fan of Carr, in his influential manifesto-like article ‘Social Forces, States, and World Orders: beyond International Relations Theory’, <span class="italic">Millennium</span>, Vol. 10, No. 2, Summer 1981, pp. 126–55. Of equal significance was Ken Booth’s inaugural lecture delivered in Aberystwyth in 1991, ‘Security in Anarchy: Utopian Realism in Theory and Practice’, later published in a slightly modified form in <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, Vol. 67, No. 3, 1991, pp. 527–45. Andrew Linklater also played an important part in drawing attention to the more critical side of Carr. Among other things see his <span class="italic">Beyond Realism and Marxism: Critical Theory and International Relations</span> (London: Macmillan Press – now Palgrave, 1990); ‘The Question of the Next Stage in International Relations Theory: A Critical-Theoretical Point of View’, <span class="italic">Millennium</span>, Vol. 21, 1992; and ‘The Transformation of Political Community: E. H. Carr, Critical Theory and International Relations’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 23, 1997, pp. 321–8. See also: Paul Howe, ‘The Utopian Realism of E. H. Carr’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 20, 1994, pp. 277–97; Richard Falk, ‘The Critical Realist Tradition and the Demystification of Inter-State Power: E. H. Carr, Hedley Bull, Robert Cox’, in Stephen Gill and James H. Mittelman, <span class="italic">Innovation and Transformation in International Studies</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997); and Vendulka Kubalkova, ‘<span class="italic">The Twenty Years</span>’ Catharsis: E. H. Carr and IR’, in Vendulka Kubalkova, Nicholas Onuf and Paul Kowert (eds), <span class="italic">International Relations in a Constructed World</span> (Armonk: Myron Sharpe, 1998), pp. 25–57. For an interesting, but brief discussion of Carr by a Marxist, see Justin Rosenberg’s observations on Carr as one of many troubled realists in his <span class="italic">The Empire of Civil Society</span> (London: Verso, 1994), pp. 10–15.</p>
<p class="para">Carr’s ideas clearly continue to excite interest. His views on nationalism, for example, are discussed by Ernest Gellner in ‘Nationalism reconsidered and E. H. Carr’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 18, 1992, pp. 285–93, a sympathetic but not uncritical analysis. For a constructivist reading of Carr see Cecilia Lynch, ‘E. H. Carr, International Relations Theory and the Societal Origins of International Legal Norms’, <span class="italic">Millennium</span>, Vol. 23, No. 3, 1994, pp. 589–620, who attacks Carr for too easily dismissing the applicability of law, ethics and international organisations for the regulation of relations between states. It is also important to consult the three essays by Charles Jones, ‘E. H. Carr through Cold War Lenses: Nationalism, Large States and the Shaping of Opinion’, in Andrea Bosco and Cornelia Navari (eds), <span class="italic">Chatham House and British Foreign Policy 1919–1945: the Royal Institute of International Affairs During the Inter-War Period</span> (London: Lothian Foundation, 1994), pp. 163–85; ‘E. H. Carr, Ambivalent Realist’, in Francis A. Beer and Robert Hariman (eds), <span class="italic">Post-Realism: the Rhetorical Turn in International Relations</span> (East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1996), pp. 95–119; and ‘Carr, Mannheim and a Post-Positivist Science in International Relations’, <span class="italic">Political Studies</span>, Vol. XLV, 1997, pp. 232–46 where Jones explores the relationship between Carr and modern post-positivism through a reading of Mannheim. A provocative analysis of Carr’s relationship to inter-war ‘idealism’ is also provided by the American scholar Brian C. Schmidt, <span class="italic">The Political Discourse of Anarchy: a Disciplinary History of International Relations</span> (New York: State University of New York Press, 1998). For a more general overview see Michael Cox, ‘Will the real E. H. Carr please stand up?’, <span class="italic">International Affairs</span>, Vol. 75, No. 3, July 1999, pp. 643–53. On realism – again – look at Randall L. Schweller and William C. Wohlforth, ‘Evaluating Realism in Response to the End of the Cold War’, <span class="italic">Security Studies</span>, Vol. 9, No. 3, Spring 2000, pp. 86–107 where the two Americans use Carr’s thesis about ‘peaceful change as an adjustment to the changed power relations’ as a way of explaining the end of the Cold War. Finally, Stefano Guzzini’s ‘The Different Worlds of Realism in International Relations’, <span class="italic">Millennium</span>, Vol. 30, No. 1, 2001, pp. 1–11, and Peter Wilson’s ‘Radicalism for a Conservative Purpose: The Peculiar Realism of E. H. Carr’, ibid., pp. 123–36, provide a much wider perspective on realism in general and Carr in particular.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>