<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="frontMatterPage" id="FE">
<p class="chapterTitle2"><span class="italic">From the First to the Second Editions of</span> The Twenty Years’ Crisis<span class="italic">: A Case of Self-censorship?</span></p>
<p class="NoIndent">By the end of the Second World War, E. H. Carr had achieved something of a minor celebrity status. The first edition of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> had been reviewed widely and within a few months of publication in late 1939 had been printed four times, with early sales somewhere close to 8,000. By 1945 the book had even been translated into Spanish and Swedish. In 1942 Carr had then brought out his more forward-looking and altogether more popular study <span class="italic">The Conditions of Peace</span> – a powerful analysis of the world crisis with a set of policy recommendations to follow. Indeed, Carr was so confident of the message it contained that he requested that his publishers send a copy to President Franklin Roosevelt at the White House;<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn1" id="FE_fn1">1</a> they in turn wondered whether or not he would be prepared to write a ‘sequel’, which was bound to be ‘very popular both here and in the America’.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn2" id="FE_fn2">2</a> Carr declined. Finally, there were his regular leader columns in <span class="italic">The Times</span> of London, which by the end of the war had earned him the wrath of the Prime Minister, and the unofficial title of the ‘Red Professor of Printing House Square’ from those who neither liked his argument for economic planning, nor his ongoing advocacy of a post-war alliance between the Soviet Union, America and Britain. Carr may not have been a household name exactly, but he did have what one critic termed ‘a strong position with the public’.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn3" id="FE_fn3">3</a> Certainly, it was strong enough to provoke an outburst by F. A. Hayek in his famous study <span class="italic">The Road To Serfdom</span>, published the following year. Carr, Hayek believed, was one of the ‘totalitarians in our midst’ whose ‘contempt’ for ‘all ideas of liberal economists’ was ‘as profound as that of any’ expressed by any German thinker in the past. In fact, according to Hayek, he was probably one of the more dangerous of that particular breed who were currently threatening the cause of political liberty and economic freedom in Britain; consequently his views had to be taken very seriously indeed by all those who wished to defend both.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn4" id="FE_fn4">4</a></p>
<p class="para">Ever keen to make the most out of their very prolific rising star (in 1945 Carr had just signed a contract to write a study of Soviet Russia, in the same year he had brought out <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span>, 1946 saw the appearance of another edition of his hugely popular <span class="italic">International Relations Between the Two World Wars</span>, as well as his <span class="italic">Soviet Impact on the Western World</span>), it made perfect sense for Macmillan to publish a new edition of the already well known <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Carr was obviously enthusiastic too, and though not insensitive to the controversy the book had already created, was keen to see the volume back in the bookshops. On 23 July 1945, he thus returned the corrected galleys to Lovatt Dickson at Macmillan, and four months later, in November, sent back the corrected proofs with a new index made necessary by virtue of the fact that he had made some alterations to the original text of 1939.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn5" id="FE_fn5">5</a> However, as he explained in the preface to the second edition, these were of no great import. He wrote ‘I have changed nothing of substance and have not sought to modify expressions of opinion merely on the grounds that I should not unreservedly endorse them today’. Yet he did concede that he had changed a few things. Nothing of significance perhaps. However, he had, to use his own words, ‘recast’ some ‘phrases which would be misleading or difficult to readers now far remote in time from the original context’, modified ‘a few sentences which have invited misunderstanding’, and removed ‘two or three passages relating to current controversies which have been eclipsed or put in a different perspective by the lapse oftime’.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn6" id="FE_fn6">6</a></p>
<p class="para">What were these modifications, and how substantial were they? Carr thought they were minor. Others since have disagreed, including the well known American academic William T. R. Fox, famous for many things, but especially for having coined the term ‘superpowers’ back in 1944. In the first E. H. Carr Memorial Lecture given in Aberystwyth in 1984, Fox argued that the deletions that Carr said were trivial were perhaps not trivial at all, but ‘crucial’. Fox admitted to being ‘shocked’ when he discovered what had been omitted from the original edition of 1939. For what he discovered, and what made him indignant ‘initially’, was a series of cuts pertaining to the Munich agreement of 1938 and Carr’s less than sensitive references to the fate of Czechoslovakia. Fox, to be fair, did understand why Carr had made the changes. After all, <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, he reasoned, was a text of its time, which saw itself as an intervention into the policy debates of the late 1930s – on the side of appeasement – but which also contained what Carr hoped, and Fox agreed, were some fundamental statements about the nature of international relations. So deleting a few phrases here and there was perhaps no bad thing as this helped ‘shed’ the book’s ‘period piece aspect’ and allowed it to ‘stand on its more enduring merits’. The real issue in fact was not whether Carr should have made the changes in 1945 for the 1946 second edition, but whether he might have done so back in late 1939, just before the book was about to be published, but when it must have been perfectly obvious that appeasement as a policy was in tatters. However, as Fox went on to speculate, the reason Carr did not do so was possibly because he still hoped that the final plunge into total war could be avoided after the initial ‘phony’ skirmishes in late 1939. Thus there was no reason to delete the offending passages. By leaving them in he might even be able help avert the ‘pointless carnage’ that was bound to follow if his argument was either ignored by policy-makers or rendered irrelevant by Hitler’s bombers.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn7" id="FE_fn7">7</a></p>
<p class="para">Fox was neither the first nor was he to be the last to comment on Carr’s revisions. He also included a couple of the deleted passages by way of illustration. What he did not do – and in the context of a short article could not do – was to include all the deletions. Hence, while many students might be aware of the fact that certain changes were made, they are unable to judge how important these are, and whether or not they represent a major or minor modification to the original text of 1939. In the normal run of things this would not matter; except that in this particular case, the very existence of the alterations has led to suspicion regarding Carr and possibly even about the probity of the second edition of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> itself.</p>
<p class="para">To clear up the ‘mystery’ of the missing passages, it might be useful to begin with a brief discussion of Carr’s views on appeasement. As is well known, Carr had always felt that the inter-war system was deeply flawed, and that one of the reasons for this was Germany’s impossible position as a ‘have-not’ state within it. Change to this system was therefore inevitable, and it was better that this occurred through negotiation around an agreed agenda rather than by any other means. This of course is why Carr was preoccupied with the whole notion of ‘peaceful change’ (the title of the crucial <a href="35_ch13.xhtml">Chapter 13</a>), and why he had been researching the subject so assiduously since he had resigned from the Foreign Office in early 1936. Indeed, in the same year that he had taken up his new academic post in Aberystwyth in Wales, he had become closely involved in a discussion group at Chatham House in London, the very purpose of which was to explore the issue.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn8" id="FE_fn8">8</a></p>
<p class="para">Thereafter, as his diaries reveal, he read widely on the subject in preparation for the volume that was finally published three years later in the form of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. One could even argue that one of the many reasons why he wrote the book in the first place was to provide a theoretical, as opposed to a political explanation as to why peaceful change in the European system was a perfectly acceptable principle, and that there was no reason why it should not be applied to Germany as well. Germany after all had been dealt a very tough hand at Versailles. The whole structure of the inter-war system had then been rendered non-viable by what Carr, among others, regarded as the indiscriminate use of the slogan of self-determination in 1919 (this is why he was especially critical of the Americans in general and Woodrow Wilson in particular). Moreover, it seemed to Carr, as it did to nearly everybody else within the political class at the time, that Britain’s real interests in the world lay outside of Europe and not within it. Thus Britain had no serious reason for opposing Germany’s legitimate desire to change a status quo that Carr never believed was defensible anyway. All this, and much more, about the real-world situation, including some fairly negative statements regarding the rights of small nations and the importance of big ones, can be found running like red threads through the whole of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Furthermore, these can be found in both editions of the book, which in terms of overall argument and structure are virtually identical.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn9" id="FE_fn9">9</a></p>
<p class="para">The changes that Carr made, therefore, need to be put into perspective. In no way do they alter the book’s central claims. Nor do they do anything to modify his analysis of peaceful change in the international system. On the other hand, he does leave out some of the details and examples that he employed in the first edition; the reason, one must suspect, is because to those reading the volume in 1946 as opposed to 1939, they were bound to rankle somewhat. In fact, to be told that Munich was no bad thing after the searing experience of war and the failure of appeasement as a policy, might have annoyed a very large number of people indeed! Carr also made more than just one change to the original text, and while some of these were of no real importance at all, one or two were fairly blunt. Thus Carr decided to get rid of them, not to hide his opinions so much as to ensure that some of the more embarrassing sentences did not get in the way of the main thesis.</p>
<p class="para">The bulk of the amendments are to be found in the chapter on peaceful change. Having discussed the issue in general terms, Carr then cites two examples of ‘peaceful change’ in action (in the first edition though not in the second).<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn10" id="FE_fn10">10</a> The less controversial of the two (which remained in the second edition) was the nineteenth-century case of Bulgaria, which in 1877 had been deprived of much of the territory it had originally gained as a result of the Treaty of San Stefano. Whether or not this was fair did not much concern Carr: what did was that this change was brought about not by a war between the major powers of the time, but following ‘discussions round a table in Berlin’. It was at this point that he made his first significant deletion by removing from the second edition a more modern example of another case where peaceful change had come about through negotiations around another table in Germany. He wrote in the first edition, but not in the second:</p>
<p class="extract">If the power relations of Europe in 1938 made it inevitable that Czecho-Slovakia should lose part of her territory, and eventually her independence, it was preferable (quite apart from any question of justice or injustice) that this should come about as the result of discussions round a table in Munich rather than as the result either of a war between the Great Powers or of a local war between Germany and Czecho-Slovakia.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Carr could not be more explicit. Part of Czechoslovakia was going to be taken by Germany anyway, given the balance of power in Europe in 1938. Far better that it happen through reasoned debate between the ‘great powers’ rather than war. Thus in defence of the proposition that peaceful change was bound to be better than war – this being the ultimate purpose of statecraft after all – Carr felt no qualms about justifying Munich. Four paragraphs on, he then made yet another alteration in the context of a much wider discussion of what he called in both editions ‘the failure to achieve a peaceful settlement with Germany in the period between the two world wars’. There was a broad consensus, he argued, that some parts of the settlement in 1919 had been ‘just’ and some ‘unjust’, and it was only a matter of time before the ‘unjust’ parts were rectified. ‘Unfortunately’ Germany did not have enough power in the 1920s to do anything to change the situation, and by the time it did, after Hitler assumed office, it addressed the problem in a rather different fashion. At this point Carr changed the wording somewhat, and in the second edition of 1946 he argued: ‘By the time Germany had regained her power, she had adopted a completely cynical attitude about the role of morality in international politics.’ In the original, first edition of 1939 he wrote:</p>
<p class="extract">By the time Germany regained her power she had become – not without reason – almost wholly disillusioned about the role of morality in international politics.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">He then added:</p>
<p class="extract">There was not, even as late as 1936, any reasonable prospect of obtaining major modifications of the Versailles Peace Treaty by peaceful negotiation unsupported by the ultimatum or the fait accompli.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Here the main argument is not affected, but whereas in the new edition Carr merely describes Germany adopting a cynical attitude towards morality, in the first he almost appears to justify what Germany did. After all, her disillusionment with morality was, according to Carr in 1939 (but not in 1946), ‘not without reason’. Moreover, whereas he seemed keen in every other circumstance to make the case for peaceful change, here he comes rather close to doing the opposite: that is, of providing a historical rationale of Germany threatening to use force. Indeed, if she had not acted in a threatening manner, says Carr, ‘she’ (Germany) might not have achieved what he already thought the status quo powers ought to have conceded through peaceful negotiations anyway. The change in words might be subtle, but the change in meaning is less so.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn11" id="FE_fn11">11</a></p>
<p class="para">This brings us to the third modification. In both editions Carr is critical of the way in which the status quo powers dealt with Germany in the late 1930s. According to Carr, it was not wrong for them to have acquiesced in what Germany did in Europe before 1938. What was wrong was to do so under protest. This, he went on, ‘inevitably created the impression that the remonstrating Powers acquiesced merely because they were unable or unwilling to make the effort to resist’, not because they felt the changes were either ‘reasonable and just’. Therefore what might have become a cause of ‘reconciliation’ became a factor in the ‘further estrangement between Germany and the Versailles Powers’, and so ‘destroyed instead of increasing the limited stock of common feeling which had formerly existed’.</p>
<p class="para">In the first edition, however, we also discover the following:</p>
<p class="extract">In March 1939, the Prime Minister admitted that in all the modifications of the Treaty down to and including the Munich Agreement, there was ‘something to be said for the necessity of a change in the existing situation’. If, in 1935 and 1936, this ‘something’ had been clearly and decisively said, to the exclusion of the scoldings and protests by the official spokesmen of the status quo Powers, it might not have been too late to bring further changes within the framework of peaceful negotiation [and this, Carr continued] was a tragedy—for which the sole responsibility cannot be laid at Germany’s door.</p>
<p class="para">Here Carr is not saying anything he had not said elsewhere before. However, whereas in 1946 he says nothing about direct responsibility, he does so in 1939 – and not all of it, he argues, is Germany’s. Furthermore, by citing the Prime Minister in March 1939, Carr is also suggesting that whereas his predecessors had got things wrong (in another volume published at almost the same time as <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>, Carr characterized their policy as oscillating ‘between two opposite and incompatible extremes’),<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn12" id="FE_fn12">12</a> the current British leader – Neville Chamberlain – might have got it right, or at least was prepared to accept what others had not: that Germany had a case and that measured change in the European order was both necessary and right.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn13" id="FE_fn13">13</a></p>
<p class="para">Carr then added another whole paragraph that did not appear in 1946. I quote in full:</p>
<p class="extract">The negotiations which led up to the Munich Agreement of September 29, 1938, were the nearest approach in recent years to the settlement of a major international issue by a procedure of peaceful change. The element of power was present. The element of morality was also present in the form of the common recognition by the Powers, who effectively decided the issue, of a criterion applicable to the dispute: the principle of self-determination. The injustice of the incorporation in Czecho-Slovakia of three-and-a-quarter million protesting Germans had been attacked in the past by many British critics, including the Labour Party and Mr. Lloyd George. Nor had the promises made by M. Benes at the Peace Conference regarding their treatment been fully carried out. The change in itself was one that corresponded both to a change in the European equilibrium of forces and to accepted canons of international morality. Other aspects of it were, however, less reassuring. Herr Hitler himself seemed morbidly eager to emphasise the element of force and to minimise that of peaceful negotiation – a trait psychologically understandable as a product of the methods employed by the Allies at Versailles, but nonetheless inimical to the establishment of a procedure of peaceful change. The principle of self-determination, once accepted, was applied with a ruthlessness that left to Germany the benefit of every doubt and paid a minimum of attention to every Czecho-Slovak susceptibility. There was a complete lack of any German readiness to make the smallest sacrifice for the sake of conciliation. The agreement was violently attacked by a section of British opinion. Recriminations ensued on the German side; and very soon any prospect that the Munich settlement might inaugurate a happier period of international relations in which peaceful change by negotiation would become an effective factor seemed to have disappeared.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Here at least Carr makes some attempt to scold Hitler for having acted without due regard to Czechoslovak sensibilities after he had invaded part of the country in 1938. Indeed, he blames Hitler for not having used the opportunity presented by Munich to build a new, improved relationship with the other great powers. However, Hitler’s actions are partly justified on the ‘understandable’ grounds that the Allies themselves had employed dubious methods at Versailles. Moreover, there was nothing wrong with what Germany then did in 1938. In fact, according to Carr, it was an almost textbook example of peaceful change. He even suggests that Czechoslovakia may have been partly to blame for what happened by not having treated well its own German minorities before Hitler decided to move in. He then adds some minor insult to injury by seeking to justify Munich in terms of a principle with which he had always had some fundamental problems – namely, self-determination. Ironic indeed if you happened to be Carr. Less ironic than tragic if you happened to be a Czechoslovakian.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn14" id="FE_fn14">14</a></p>
<p class="para">This leads us, finally, to discuss something that Carr did not change at all, though he clearly wanted to – and perhaps should have done. As he pointed out in the preface to the second edition of 1946, his ideas about the role and position of the nation-state in the international order had undergone considerable modification since the beginning of the war and the original appearance of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. While Carr conceded in the first edition that the ‘concept of sovereignty’ was ‘likely’ to ‘become more blurred’ in the future,<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn15" id="FE_fn15">15</a> he still accepted that the nation-state in some form or another would probably remain the basic unit of the international system. As he put it in 1939, ‘the nation is now, more than ever before, the supreme unit round which centre human demands for equality and human ambitions for predominance’.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn16" id="FE_fn16">16</a> The final collapse of the inter-war system, the experience of war, and his belief by 1945 in the need for a totally restructured international economy, inclined him to a more radical conclusion: that the nation-state, both small and large, ‘was obsolete or obsolescent and that no workable international organization’ could ‘be built on a membership of a multiplicity of nation-states’. However, as he explained, he decided not to incorporate this shift into the new edition, and instead advised readers to look at his more recent book on the subject, <span class="italic">Nationalism and After</span>, published in 1945. Here they would be able to explore his ‘present views’ rather than those he had once held.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn17" id="FE_fn17">17</a></p>
<p class="para">It is of some interest, of course, that those who have been rather keen to point to those few passages where Carr provides an effective apologia for Munich, have said nothing about his equally important decision not to alter the text in a direction that might have better reflected his views on the nation-state. On the other hand, Carr himself made no reference to at least two alterations he did in fact make, one less significant than the other.</p>
<p class="para">The first can be found in the final chapter where Carr questioned whether or not the nation-state would survive as the unit of power. Following a lengthy discourse about the rise of the nation-state in history and its possible transcendence – ‘few things are permanent in history and it would be rash to assume that the territorial unit is one of them’ – he went on to discuss those factors that were undermining the nation-state and leading to ‘the formation of ever larger political and economic units’. This tendency, he noted, ‘appears to have been closely connected with the growth of large-scale capitalism and industrialism, as well as with the improvement of means of communication and of the technical instruments of power’. He then made a brief qualifying statement in 1939 (but not in 1946) about the complex character of nationalism within the larger context of the trend towards ever larger units whose</p>
<p class="extract">course was marked by a conflict between the two functions of nationalism – the integrating and the disintegrating function. Prior to the middle of the nineteenth century, nationalism had been in the main a disintegrating force, breaking off fragment after fragment from the theoretical unit of mediaeval Christendom and making them into independent national units. Then nationalism, almost suddenly, passed over to an integrating role in Germany and Italy, and developed, in the most powerful countries, into an imperialism which seemed likely to divide the world into half dozen units of power.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn18" id="FE_fn18">18</a></p>
<p class="para">Why Carr should have dropped this is something of a mystery, unless he felt it was being a little too positive about nationalism as a factor in the making of the modern world. It is difficult to know, but does at least reveal the tensions in his own thought about the phenomenon. He then added (in both editions) that: ‘The War threw this development into conspicuous relief’.</p>
<p class="para">The second change came a couple of pages later in the same discussion. At this point Carr shifted the discussion away from an analysis of those various pressures that were leading to the ‘concentration of political and economic power’. ‘That is’ only ‘one side of the picture’, he noted in the first edition of 1939; we also have to look, he said, ‘in the other direction’ where ‘disintegrating forces may still be found at work’. He continued:</p>
<p class="extract">It is a moot point whether the British Empire and the British Commonwealth of Nations are at present tending towards a strengthening or a relaxation of the bonds between the component parts. The United States are striving to extend their economic power by breaking down foreign tariff barriers. But simultaneously, within the Union, new trade barriers – still insignificant, but ever increasing – are being surreptitiously raised between the states themselves. It is not certain that Germany will be able to constitute Central and South-Eastern Europe, or Japan Eastern Asia, into a compact economic unit, or that Soviet Russia will be able to knit together her vast territories as industrial development progresses.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn19" id="FE_fn19">19</a></p>
<p class="para">One of the main reasons why Carr may have decided to remove this passage was because in the intervening years between the publication of <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span> in 1939 and the new edition of 1946, certain changes had taken place: for example, Soviet Russia had been able to ‘knit’ its territories together, and the US after the war had not only begun to break down those external tariff barriers but had become more united itself. But it is also possible that he was keen to get rid of these few sentences here for another reason, for although they did not constitute a defence of the new empires then being created by Germany or Japan, nor were they especially critical. Admittedly, Carr did go on to suggest that they (and other imperial conglomerations) might not last because there ‘may be a size which cannot be exceeded without a recrudescence of the disintegrating tendencies’.<a class="sup" href="#FE-fn20" id="FE_fn20">20</a> However, this was not something that Carr seemed to look forward to with any enthusiasm. If anything, the logic of his argument led him to another, very different conclusion: that big units were good and small ones were bad – even if the units in question happened to be dominated by Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan. To have said as much in 1939 was problematic enough: to have repeated it in 1946 after the terrible price paid to eliminate both powers might have raised more than just a few eyebrows.</p>
<p class="chapterTitle"> </p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn1" id="FE-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">E. H. Carr to Macmillan Publishers, 16 March 1942, Macmillan Publishers Archives (hereafter MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn2" id="FE-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Macmillan Publishers to E. H. Carr, 16 August and 23 August 1943 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn3" id="FE-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Gilbert Murray to Lord David Davies, 31 May 1943. University of Wales Aberystwyth Archives.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn4" id="FE-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">F. A. Hayek, <span class="italic">The Road to Serfdom</span> (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1944), pp. 138–41.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn5" id="FE-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">E. H. Carr to Macmillan Publishers, 23 July and 19 November 1945 (MPA).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn6" id="FE-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See ‘Preface to the Second Edition’, 15 November 1945, in this volume.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn7" id="FE-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">W. T. R. Fox, ‘E. H. Carr and political realism: vision and revision’, <span class="italic">Review of International Studies</span>, Vol. 11, 1985, pp. 1–16.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn8" id="FE-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Discussion at Chatham House of Manning’s views on peaceful change’, 19 May 1936. Entry into the Carr Diaries, The University of Birmingham. The book that finally emerged from these discussions was edited by C. A. W. Manning under the title of <span class="italic">Peaceful Change</span> and was cited extensively by Carr in <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>. Manning at the time was Montagu Burton Professor of International Relations at the London School of Economics. Carr later thanked Manning for reading and commenting on <span class="italic">The Twenty Years’ Crisis</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn9" id="FE-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">One interesting little change that Carr did make was to change the designation of Hitler from ‘Herr Hitler’ in the 1939 edition to just ‘Hitler’ in the 1946 edition.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn10" id="FE-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Compare pp. 278 (first edition, 1939), 219 (second edition, 1946) and 199 (2001 edition).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn11" id="FE-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Compare pp. 281(first edition), 221 (second edition) and 201 (2001 edition).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn12" id="FE-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See E. H. Carr, <span class="italic">Britain: a Study of Foreign Policy from the Versailles Treaty to the Outbreak of War</span> (London: Longmans, Green and Co., 1939), p. 157. In the same volume Carr noted: ‘Mr Chamberlain perceived more clearly than any other political leader the growing danger of a policy of words not matched either by willingness or a capacity to act’ (p. 166)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn13" id="FE-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Compare pp. 281–2 (first edition), 222 (second edition) and 201 (2001 edition).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn14" id="FE-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Compare pp. 282–3 (first edition), 222 (second edition) and 201 (2001 edition).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn15" id="FE-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Cited in first edition on pp. 295–6; second edition, p. 230; 2001 edition, p. 212.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn16" id="FE-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">First edition 1939, p. 291. In the second edition the ‘now’ was dropped. Carr thus wrote in 1946: ‘The nation became, more than ever before, the supreme unit round which centre human demands for equality and human demands for predominance’ (p. 227). 2001 edition, p. 210.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn17" id="FE-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See the ‘Preface to the Second Edition’, p. viii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn18" id="FE-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See pp. 293–4 (first edition), 229 (second edition), 211 (2001 edition).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn19" id="FE-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See pp. 295 (first edition), 230 (second edition), 212 (2001 edition).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#FE_fn20" id="FE-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">First edition, p. 295; second edition, p. 230; 2001 edition, p. 212.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>