<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="chapter" id="ch02">
<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_12"/>CHAPTER TWO</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">Utopia and Reality</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The antithesis of utopia and reality – a balance always swinging towards and away from equilibrium and never completely attaining it – is a fundamental antithesis revealing itself in many forms of thought. The two methods of approach – the inclination to ignore what was and what is in contemplation of what should be, and the inclination to deduce what should be from what was and what is – determine opposite attitudes towards every political problem. ‘It is the eternal dispute’, as Albert Sorel puts it, ‘between those who imagine the world to suit their policy, and those who arrange their policy to suit the realities of the world.’<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn1" id="ch02_fn1">1</a> It may be suggestive to elaborate this antithesis before proceeding to an examination of the current crisis of international politics.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch02-head1">Free will and determination</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The antithesis of utopia and reality can in some aspects be identified with the antithesis of Free Will and Determinism. The utopian is necessarily voluntarist: he believes in the possibility of more or less radically rejecting reality, and substituting his utopia for it by an act of will. The realist analyses a predetermined course of development which he is powerless to change. For the realist, philosophy, in the famous words of Hegel’s preface to his <span class="italic">Philosophy of Right</span>, always ‘comes too late’ to change the world. By means of philosophy, the old order ‘cannot be rejuvenated, but only known’. The utopian, fixing his eyes on the future, thinks in terms of creative spontaneity: the realist, rooted in the past, in terms of causality. All healthy human action, and therefore all healthy thought, must establish a balance between utopia and reality, between free will and determinism. The complete realist, unconditionally accepting the causal sequence of events, deprives himself of the possibility of changing reality. The complete utopian, by rejecting the causal sequence, deprives himself of the possibility of understanding either the reality which he is seeking to change or the processes by which it can be changed. The characteristic vice of the utopian is naïvety; of the realist, sterility.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn2" id="ch02_fn2">2</a></p>
<p class="header1" id="ch02-head2"><a id="page_13"/>Theory and practice</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The antithesis of utopia and reality also coincides with the antithesis of theory and practice. The utopian makes political theory a norm to which political practice ought to conform. The realist regards political theory as a sort of codification of political practice. The relationship of theory and practice has come to be recognized in recent years as one of the central problems of political thought. Both the utopian and the realist distort this relationship. The utopian, purporting to recognize the interdependence of purpose and fact, treats purpose as if it were the only relevant fact, and constantly couches optative propositions in the indicative mood. The American Declaration of Independence maintains that ‘all men are created equal’, Mr Litvinov that ‘peace is indivisible’,<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn3" id="ch02_fn3">3</a> and Sir Norman Angell that ‘the biological division of mankind into independent warring states’ is a ‘scientific ineptitude’.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn4" id="ch02_fn4">4</a> Yet it is a matter of common observation that all men are not born equal even in the United States, and that the Soviet Union can remain at peace while its neighbours are at war; and we should probably think little of a zoologist who described a man-eating tiger as a ‘scientific ineptitude’. These propositions are items in a political programme disguised as statements of fact;<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn5" id="ch02_fn5">5</a> and the utopian inhabits a dream-world of such ‘facts’, remote from the world of reality where quite contrary facts may be observed. The realist has no difficulty in perceiving that these utopian propositions are not facts but aspirations, and belong to the optative not to the indicative mood; and he goes on to show that, considered as aspirations, they are not a <span class="italic">priori</span> propositions, but are rooted in the world of reality in a way which the utopian altogether fails to understand. Thus for the realist, the equality of man is the ideology of the underprivileged seeking to raise themselves to the level of the privileged; the indivisibility of peace the ideology of states which, being particularly exposed to attack, are eager to establish the principle that an attack on them is a matter of concern to other states more fortunately situated;<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn6" id="ch02_fn6">6</a> the ineptitude of sovereign states the ideology of predominant Powers which find the sovereignty of other states a barrier to the enjoyment of their own predominant position. This exposure of the hidden foundations of utopian theory is a necessary preliminary to any serious political science. But the realist, in denying any a <span class="italic">priori</span> quality to political theories, and in proving them to be rooted in practice, falls easily into a determinism which argues that theory, being nothing more than a rationalization of conditioned and predetermined purpose, is a pure excrescence and impotent to alter the course of events. While therefore the utopian treats purpose as the sole ultimate fact, the realist runs the risk of treating purpose merely as the mechanical product of other facts. If we recognize that this mechanization <a id="page_14"/>of human will and human aspiration is untenable and intolerable, then we must recognize that theory, as it develops out of practice and develops into practice, plays its own transforming role in the process. The political process does not consist, as the realist believes, purely in a succession of phenomena governed by mechanical laws of causation; nor does it consist, as the utopian believes, purely in the application to practice of certain theoretical truths evolved out of their inner consciousness by wise and far-seeing people. Political science must be based on a recognition of the interdependence of theory and practice, which can be attained only through a combination of utopia and reality.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch02-head3">The intellectual and the bureaucrat</p>
<p class="NoIndent">A concrete expression of the antithesis of theory and practice in politics is the opposition between the ‘intellectual’ and the ‘bureaucrat’,<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn7" id="ch02_fn7">7</a> the former trained to think mainly on a <span class="italic">priori</span> lines, the latter empirically. It is in the nature of things that the intellectual should find himself in the camp which seeks to make practice conform to theory; for intellectuals are particularly reluctant to recognize their thought as conditioned by forces external to themselves, and like to think of themselves as leaders whose theories provide the motive force for so-called men of action. Moreover, the whole intellectual outlook of the last two hundred years has been strongly coloured by the mathematical and natural sciences. To establish a general principle, and to test the particular in the light of that principle, has been assumed by most intellectuals to be the necessary foundation and starting-point of any science. In this respect, utopianism with its insistence on general principles may be said to represent the characteristic intellectual approach to politics. Woodrow Wilson, the most perfect modern example of the intellectual in politics, ‘excelled in the exposition of fundamentals. His political method . . . was to base his appeal upon broad and simple principles, avoiding commitment upon specific measures.’<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn8" id="ch02_fn8">8</a> Some supposedly general principle, such as ‘national self-determination’, ‘free trade’ or ‘collective security’ (all of which will be easily recognized by the realist as concrete expressions of particular conditions and interests), is taken as an absolute standard, and policies are adjudged good or bad by the extent to which they conform to, or diverge from, it. In modern times, intellectuals have been the leaders of every utopian movement; and the services which utopianism has rendered to political progress must be credited in large part to them. But the characteristic weakness of utopianism is also the characteristic weakness of the political intellectuals – failure to understand existing reality and the way in which their own standards are rooted in it. ‘They could give to their political aspirations’, wrote Meinecke of the role of <a id="page_15"/>intellectuals in German politics, ‘a spirit of purity and independence, of philosophical idealism and of elevation above the concrete play of interests . . . but through their defective feeling for the realistic interests of actual state life they quickly descended from the sublime to the extravagant and eccentric.’<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn9" id="ch02_fn9">9</a></p>
<p class="para">It has often been argued that the intellectuals are less directly conditioned in their thinking than those groups whose coherence depends on a common economic interest, and that they therefore occupy a vantage point <span class="italic">au-dessus de la mêlée</span>. As early as 1905, Lenin attacked ‘the old-fashioned view of the intelligentsia as capable . . . of standing outside class’.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn10" id="ch02_fn10">10</a> More recently, this view has been resuscitated by Dr Mannheim, who argues that the intelligentsia, being ‘<span class="italic">relatively</span> classless’ and ‘socially unattached’, ‘subsumes in itself all those interests with which social life is permeated’, and can therefore attain a higher measure of impartiality and objectivity.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn11" id="ch02_fn11">11</a> In a certain limited sense, this is true. But any advantage derived from it would seem to be nullified by a corresponding disability, i.e. detachment from the masses whose attitude is the determining factor in political life. Even where the illusion of their leadership was strongest, modern intellectuals have often found themselves in the position of officers whose troops were ready enough to follow them in quiet times, but could be relied on to desert in any serious engagement. In Germany and many smaller European countries, the democratic constitutions of 1919 were the work of devoted intellectuals, and achieved a high degree of theoretical perfection. But when a crisis occurred, they broke down almost everywhere through failure to win the durable allegiance of the mass of the population. In the United States, the intellectuals played a preponderant part in creating the League of Nations, and most of them remained avowed supporters of it. Yet the mass of the American people, having appeared to follow their lead, rejected it when the critical moment arrived. In Great Britain, the intellectuals secured, by a devoted and energetic propaganda, overwhelming paper support for the League of Nations. But when the Covenant appeared to require action which might have entailed practical consequences for the mass of the people, successive governments preferred inaction; and the protests of the intellectuals caused no perceptible reaction in the country.</p>
<p class="para">The bureaucratic approach to politics is, on the other hand, fundamentally empirical. The bureaucrat purports to handle each particular problem ‘on its merits’, to eschew the formulation of principles and to be guided on the right course by some intuitive process born of long experience and not of conscious reasoning. ‘There are no general cases,’ said a French official, acting as French Delegate at an Assembly of the League of Nations; ‘there are only specific cases.’<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn12" id="ch02_fn12">12</a> In his dislike of theory, the bureaucrat <a id="page_16"/>resembles the man of action. ‘On s’engage, puis on voit’ is a motto attributed to more than one famous general. The excellence of the British civil service is partly due to the ease with which the bureaucratic mentality accommodates itself to the empirical tradition of British politics. The perfect civil servant conforms closely to the popular picture of the English politician as a man who recoils from written constitutions and solemn covenants, and lets himself be guided by precedent, by instinct, by feel for the right thing. This empiricism is itself, no doubt, conditioned by a specific point of view, and reflects the conservative habit of English political life. The bureaucrat, perhaps more explicitly than any other class of the community, is bound up with the existing order, the maintenance of tradition, and the acceptance of precedent as the ‘safe’ criterion of action. Hence bureaucracy easily degenerates into the rigid and empty formalism of the mandarin, and claims an esoteric understanding of appropriate procedures which is not accessible even to the most intelligent outsider. ‘Expérience vaut mieux que science’ is the typical bureaucratic motto. ‘Attainments in learning and science’, wrote Bryce, voicing a widely felt prejudice, ‘do little to make men wise in politics.’<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn13" id="ch02_fn13">13</a> When a bureaucrat wishes to damn a proposal, he calls it ‘academic’. Practice, not theory, bureaucratic training, not intellectual brilliance, is the school of political wisdom. The bureaucrat tends to make politics an end in themselves. It is worth remarking that both Machiavelli and Bacon were bureaucrats.</p>
<p class="para">This fundamental antithesis between intellectual and bureaucratic modes of thought, always and everywhere latent, has appeared in the last half century in a quarter where it would hardly have been looked for: in the labour movement. Writing in the 1870s, Engels congratulated the German workers on the fact that they ‘belong to the most theoretical nation in the world, and have retained that theoretical sense which has been almost completely lost by the so-called “educated” classes in Germany’. He contrasted this happy state with ‘the indifference to all theory which is one of the chief reasons of the slow progress of the English workers’ movement’.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn14" id="ch02_fn14">14</a> Forty years later, another German writer confirmed this observation.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn15" id="ch02_fn15">15</a> The theoretical analysis of Marxist doctrine became one of the principal preoccupations of leading German Social Democrats; and many observers believe that this one-sided intellectual development was an important factor in the ultimate collapse of the party. The British labour movement, until the last few years, entirely eschewed theory. At present, imperfect harmony between the intellectual and trade union wings is a notorious source of embarrassment to the Labour Party. The trade unionist tends to regard the intellectual as a utopian theorist lacking experience in the practical problems of the movement. The intellectual condemns the trade union leader as a <a id="page_17"/>bureaucrat. The recurrent conflicts between factions within the Bolshevik party in Soviet Russia were in part, at any rate, explicable as conflicts between the ‘party intelligentsia’, represented by Bukharin, Kamenev, Radek and Trotsky, and the ‘party machine’ represented by Lenin, Sverdlov (till his death in 1919) and Stalin.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn16" id="ch02_fn16">16</a></p>
<p class="para">The opposition between intellectual and bureaucrat was particularly prominent in Great Britain during the twenty years between the wars in the field of foreign affairs. During the first world war, the Union of Democratic Control, an organization of utopian intellectuals, strove to popularize the view that the war was largely due to the control of foreign affairs in all countries by professional diplomats. Woodrow Wilson believed that peace would be secured if international issues were settled ‘not by diplomats or politicians each eager to serve his own interests, but by dispassionate scientists – geographers, ethnologists, economists – who had made studies of the problems involved’.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn17" id="ch02_fn17">17</a> Bureaucrats, and especially diplomats, were long regarded with suspicion in League of Nations circles; and it was considered that the League would contribute greatly to the solution of international problems by taking them out of the reactionary hands of foreign offices. Wilson, in introducing the draft Covenant to the plenary session of the Peace Conference, spoke of ‘the feeling that, if the deliberating body of the League of Nations was merely to be a body of officials representing the various governments, the peoples of the world would not be sure that some of the mistakes which preoccupied officials had admittedly made might not be repeated’.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn18" id="ch02_fn18">18</a> Later, in the House of Commons, Lord Cecil was more scathing:</p>
<p class="extract">I am afraid I came to the conclusion at the Peace Conference, from my own experience, that the Prussians were not exclusively confined to Germany. There is also the whole tendency and tradition of the official classes . . . You cannot avoid the conclusion that there is a tendency among them to think that whatever is is right.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn19" id="ch02_fn19">19</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">At the Second Assembly, Lord Cecil invoked the support of ‘public opinion’, which the League was supposed to represent, against the ‘official classes’;<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn20" id="ch02_fn20">20</a> and such appeals were frequently heard during the next ten years. The bureaucrat for his part equally mistrusted the missionary zeal of enthusiastic intellectuals for collective security, world order and general disarmament – schemes which seemed to him the product of pure theory divorced from practical experience. The disarmament issue well illustrated this divergence of view. For the intellectual, the general principle was simple and straightforward; the alleged difficulties of applying it were due to obstruction by the ‘experts’.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn21" id="ch02_fn21">21</a> For the expert, the general principle was <a id="page_18"/>meaningless and utopian; whether armaments could be reduced, and if so which, was a ‘practical’ question to be decided in each case ‘on its merits’.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch02-head4">Left and right</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The antithesis of utopia and reality, and of theory and practice, further reproduces itself in the antithesis of radical and conservative, of Left and Right, though it would be rash to assume that parties carrying these labels always represent these underlying tendencies. The radical is necessarily utopian, and the conservative realist. The intellectual, the man of theory, will gravitate towards the Left just as naturally as the bureaucrat, the man of practice, will gravitate towards the Right. Hence the Right is weak in theory, and suffers through its inaccessibility to ideas. The characteristic weakness of the Left is failure to translate its theory into practice – a failure for which it is apt to blame the bureaucrats, but which is inherent in its utopian character. ‘The Left has reason (<span class="italic">Vernunft</span>), the Right has wisdom (<span class="italic">Verstand</span>),’ wrote the Nazi philosopher, Moeller van den Bruck.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn22" id="ch02_fn22">22</a> From the days of Burke onwards, English conservatives have always strongly denied the possibility of deducing political practice by a logical process from political theory. ‘To follow the syllogism alone is a short cut to the bottomless pit,’ says Lord Baldwin<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn23" id="ch02_fn23">23</a> – a phrase which may suggest that he practices as well as preaches abstention from rigorously logical modes of thought. Mr Churchill refuses to believe that ‘extravagant logic in doctrine’ appeals to the British elector.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn24" id="ch02_fn24">24</a> A particularly clear definition of different attitudes towards foreign policy comes from a speech made in the House of Commons by Neville Chamberlain in answer to a Labour critic:</p>
<p class="extract">What does the hon. Member mean by foreign policy? You can lay down sound and general propositions. You can say that your foreign policy is to maintain peace; you can say that it is to protect British interests, you can say that it is to use your influence, such as it is, on behalf of the right against the wrong, as far as you can tell the right from the wrong. You can lay down all these general principles, but that is not a policy. Surely, if you are to have a policy you must take the particular situations and consider what action or inaction is suitable for those particular situations. That is what I myself mean by policy, and it is quite clear that as the situations and conditions in foreign affairs continually change from day to day, your policy cannot be stated once and for all, if it is to be applicable to every situation that arises.<a class="sup" href="#ch02-fn25" id="ch02_fn25">25</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The intellectual superiority of the Left is seldom in doubt. The Left alone thinks out principles of political action and evolves ideals for statesmen to <a id="page_19"/>aim at. But it lacks practical experience which comes from close contact with reality. In Great Britain after 1919, it was a serious misfortune that the Left, having enjoyed office for negligible periods, had little experience of administrative realities and became more and more a party of pure theory, while the Right, having spent so little time in opposition, had few temptations to pit the perfection of theory against the imperfections of practice. In Soviet Russia, the group in power is more and more discarding theory in favour of practice as it loses the memory of its revolutionary origin. History everywhere shows that, when Left parties or politicians are brought into contact with reality through the assumption of political office, they tend to abandon their ‘doctrinaire’ utopianism and move towards the Right, often retaining their Left labels and thereby adding to the confusion of political terminology.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch02-head5">Ethics and politics</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Most fundamental of all, the antithesis of utopia and reality is rooted in a different conception of the relationship of politics and ethics. The antithesis between the world of value and the world of nature, already implicit in the dichotomy of purpose and fact, is deeply embedded in the human consciousness and in political thought. The utopian sets up an ethical standard which purports to be independent of politics, and seeks to make politics conform to it. The realist cannot logically accept any standard value save that of fact. In his view, the absolute standard of the utopian is conditioned and dictated by the social order, and is therefore political. Morality can only be relative, not universal. Ethics must be interpreted in terms of politics; and the search for an ethical norm outside politics is doomed to frustration. The identification of the supreme reality with the supreme good, which Christianity achieves by a bold stroke of dogmatism, is achieved by the realist through the assumption that there is no good other than the acceptance and understanding of reality.</p>
<p class="NoIndent"> </p>
<p class="NoIndent">These implications of the opposition between utopia and reality will emerge clearly from a more detailed study of the modern crisis in international politics.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch02-head6">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn1" id="ch02-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">A. Sorel, <span class="italic">L’Europe et la Révolution Française</span>, p. 474.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_20"/><a href="#ch02_fn2" id="ch02-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The psychologist may be interested to trace here an analogy – it would be dangerous to treat it as more – with Jung’s classification of psychological types as ‘introverted’ and ‘extraverted’ (Jung, <span class="italic">Psychological Types</span>) or William James’s pairs of opposites: Rationalist-Empiricist, Intellectualist-Sensationalist, Idealist-Materialist, Optimistic-Pessimistic, Religious-Irreligious, Free-willist-Fatalistic, Monistic-Pluralistic, Dogmatical-Sceptical (W. James, <span class="italic">Pragmatism</span>).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn3" id="ch02-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Sixteenth Assembly</span>, p. 72.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn4" id="ch02-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Angell, <span class="italic">The Great Illusion,</span> p. 138.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn5" id="ch02-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Similarly, Marx’s theory of surplus value has, in the words of a sympathetic critic, ‘rather the significance of a political and social slogan than of an economic truth’ (M. Beer, <span class="italic">The Life and Teaching of Karl Marx</span>, p. 129).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn6" id="ch02-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Having discovered that other states were perhaps more open to attack than themselves, the Soviet authorities in May 1939 dismissed Mr Litvinov and ceased to talk about the indivisibility of peace.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn7" id="ch02-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The term ‘bureaucrat’ may be taken for this purpose to include those members of the fighting services who are concerned with the direction of policy. It is, perhaps, unnecessary to add that not every possessor of an intellect is an intellectual, or every occupant of a desk in a government department a bureaucrat. There are, nevertheless, modes of thought which are, broadly speaking, characteristic of the ‘bureaucrat’ and the ‘intellectual’ respectively.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn8" id="ch02-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. S. Baker, <span class="italic">Woodrow Wilson: Life and Letters</span>, iii. p. 90.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn9" id="ch02-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Meinecke, <span class="italic">Staat und Perso"nlicbkeit</span>, p. 136.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn10" id="ch02-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lenin, <span class="italic">Works</span> (2nd Russian ed.), vii. p. 72.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn11" id="ch02-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Mannheim, <span class="italic">Ideology and Utopia</span>, pp. 137–40.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn12" id="ch02-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Fifteenth Assembly</span>, Sixth Committee, p. 62.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn13" id="ch02-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bryce, <span class="italic">Modern Democracies</span>, i. p. 89.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn14" id="ch02-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in Lenin, <span class="italic">Works</span> (2nd Russian ed.), iv. p. 381.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn15" id="ch02-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘We possess the most theoretical labour movement in the world’ (F. Naumann, <span class="italic">Central Europe</span>, Engl. transl., p. 121).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn16" id="ch02-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">This interpretation, which appears in Mirsky’s <span class="italic">Lenin</span> (pp. III, 117–18) published in 1931, received further confirmation from subsequent events. The rift went back to the earliest days of the party. In 1904 Lenin was attacking the party intellectuals for their neglect of discipline and organization, and the intellectuals were attacking Lenin’s bureaucratic methods (Lenin, <span class="italic">Works</span> (2nd Russian ed.), vi. pp. 309–11).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn17" id="ch02-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. S. Baker, <span class="italic">Woodrow Wilson and World Settlement</span>, i. p. 112.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn18" id="ch02-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">History of the Peace Conference</span>, ed. H. Temperley, iii. p. 62.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn19" id="ch02-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 21 July 1919: <span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. 993.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn20" id="ch02-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Second Assembly</span>, Third Committee, p. 281.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn21" id="ch02-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘It is not to be tolerated’, said the Belgian socialist De Brouckère, ‘that the people should be robbed of their hopes of peace by experts who are losing themselves in the maze of technicalities which, with a little goodwill, might be disentangled in a few hours’ (Peace and Disarmament Committee of the Women’s International Organisations: Circular of 15 May 1932). About the same time, Lord Cecil was reported in the same sense: ‘If the matter was to be left to experts nothing would be done. They were, he was sure, most able, conscientious, highly instructed gentlemen, but just look at their training’ (<span class="italic">Manchester Guardian</span>, 18 May 1932).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_21"/><a href="#ch02_fn22" id="ch02-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Moeller van den Bruck, <span class="italic">Das Dritte Reich</span> (3rd ed.), p. 257.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn23" id="ch02-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Baldwin, On <span class="italic">England</span>, p. 153.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch02_fn24" id="ch02-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Winston Churchill, <span class="italic">Step by Step</span>, p. 147.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_22"/><a href="#ch02_fn25" id="ch02-fn25">25.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 21 October 1937, reprinted in N. Chamberlain, <span class="italic">The Struggle for Peace</span>, p. 33.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>