<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="chapter" id="ch07">
<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_91"/>CHAPTER SEVEN</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">The Nature of Politics</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Man has always lived in groups. The smallest kind of human group, the family, has clearly been necessary for the maintenance of the species. But so far as is known, men have always from the most primitive times formed semi-permanent groups larger than the single family; and one of the functions of such a group has been to regulate relations between its members. Politics deals with the behaviour of men in such organized permanent or semi-permanent groups. All attempts to deduce the nature of society from the supposed behaviour of man in isolation are purely theoretical, since there is no reason to assume that such a man ever existed. Aristotle laid the foundation of all sound thinking about politics when he declared that man was by nature a political animal.</p>
<p class="para">Man in society reacts to his fellow men in two opposite ways. Sometimes he displays egoism, or the will to assert himself at the expense of others. At other times he displays sociability, or the desire to co-operate with others, to enter into reciprocal relations of good will and friendship with them, and even to subordinate himself to them. In every society, these two qualities can be seen at work. No society can exist unless a substantial proportion of its members exhibits in some degree the desire for co-operation and mutual good will. But in every society some sanction is required to produce the measure of solidarity requisite for its maintenance; and this sanction is applied by a controlling group or individual acting in the name of the society. Membership of most societies is voluntary, and the only ultimate sanction which can be applied is expulsion. But the peculiarity of political society, which in the modern world takes the form of the state, is that membership is compulsory. The state, like other societies, must be based on some sense of common interests and obligations among its members. But coercion is regularly exercised by a governing group to enforce loyalty and obedience; and this coercion inevitably means that the governors control the governed and ‘exploit’ them for their own purposes.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn1" id="ch07_fn1">1</a></p>
<p class="para">The dual character of political society is therefore strongly marked. Professor Laski tells us that ‘every state is built upon the consciences of men’.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn2" id="ch07_fn2">2</a> On the other hand, anthropology, as well as much recent history, <a id="page_92"/>teaches that ‘war seems to be the main agency in producing the state’;<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn3" id="ch07_fn3">3</a> and Professor Laski himself, in another passage, declares that ‘our civilization is held together by fear rather than by good will’.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn4" id="ch07_fn4">4</a> There is no contradiction between these apparently opposite views. When Tom Paine, in the <span class="italic">Rights of Man</span>, tries to confront Burke with the dilemma that ‘governments arise either out of the people or over the people’, the answer is that they do both. Coercion and conscience, enmity and good will, self-assertion and self-subordination, are present in every political society. The state is built up out of these two conflicting aspects of human nature. Utopia and reality, the ideal and the institution, morality and power, are from the outset inextricably blended in it. In the making of the United States, as a modern American writer has said, ‘Hamilton stood for strength, wealth and power, Jefferson for the American dream’; and both the power and the dream were necessary ingredients.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn5" id="ch07_fn5">5</a></p>
<p class="para">If this be correct, we can draw one important conclusion. The utopian who dreams that it is possible to eliminate self-assertion from politics and to base a political system on morality alone is just as wide of the mark as the realist who believes that altruism is an illusion and that all political action is based on self-seeking. These errors have both left their mark on popular terminology. The phrase ‘power politics’ is often used in an invidious sense, as if the element of power or self-assertion in politics were something abnormal and susceptible of elimination from a healthy political life. Conversely, there is a disposition, even among some writers who are not strictly speaking realists, to treat politics as the science of power and self-assertion and exclude from it by definition actions inspired by the moral consciousness. Professor Catlin describes the <span class="italic">homo politicus</span> as one who ‘seeks to bring into conformity with his own will the wills of others, so that he may the better attain his own ends’.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn6" id="ch07_fn6">6</a> Such terminological implications are misleading. Politics cannot be divorced from power. But the <span class="italic">homo politicus</span> who pursues nothing but power is as unreal a myth as the <span class="italic">homo economicus</span> who pursues nothing but gain. Political action must be based on a co-ordination of morality and power.</p>
<p class="para">This truth is of practical as well as theoretical importance. It is as fatal in politics to ignore power as it is to ignore morality. The fate of China in the nineteenth century is an illustration of what happens to a country which is content to believe in the moral superiority of its own civilization and to despise the ways of power. The Liberal Government of Great Britain nearly came to grief in the spring of 1914 because it sought to pursue an Irish policy based on moral authority unsupported (or rather, directly opposed) by effective military power. In Germany, the Frankfort Assembly of 1848 is the classic example of the impotence of ideas divorced from power; and the Weimar Republic broke down because many of the <a id="page_93"/>policies it pursued – in fact, nearly all of them except its opposition to the communists – were unsupported, or actively opposed, by effective military power.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn7" id="ch07_fn7">7</a> The utopian, who believes that democracy is not based on force, refuses to look these unwelcome facts in the face.</p>
<p class="para">On the other hand, the realist, who believes that, if you look after the power, the moral authority will look after itself, is equally in error. The most recent form of this doctrine is embodied in the much-quoted phrase: ‘The function of force is to give moral ideas times to take root’. Internationally, this argument was used in 1919 by those who, unable to defend the Versailles Treaty on moral grounds, maintained that this initial act of power would pave the way for subsequent moral appeasement. Experience has done little to confirm this comfortable belief. The same fallacy is implicit in the once popular view that the aim of British policy should be ‘to rebuild the League of Nations, to make it capable of holding a political aggressor in restraint by armed power, and thereafter to labour faithfully for the mitigation of just and real grievances’.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn8" id="ch07_fn8">8</a> Once the enemy has been crushed or the ‘aggressor’ restrained by force, the ‘thereafter’ fails to arrive. The illusion that priority can be given to power and that morality will follow, is just as dangerous as the illusion that priority can be given to moral authority and that power will follow.</p>
<p class="para">Before proceeding, however, to consider the respective roles of power and morality in politics, we must take some note of the views of those who, though far from being realists, identify politics with power and believe that moral concepts must be altogether excluded from its scope. There is, according to this view, an essential antinomy between politics and morality; and the moral man as such will therefore have nothing to do with politics. This thesis has many attractions, and reappears at different periods of history and in different contexts. It takes at least three forms.</p>
<p class="para">(i) Its simplest form is the doctrine of non-resistance. The moral man recognizes the existence of political power as an evil, but regards the use of power to resist power as a still greater evil. This is the basis of such doctrines of non-resistance as those of Jesus or of Gandhi, or of modern pacifism. It amounts, in brief, to a boycott of politics.</p>
<p class="para">(ii) The second form of the antithesis between politics and morality is anarchism. The state, as the principal organ of political power, is ‘the most flagrant, most cynical and most complete negation of humanity’.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn9" id="ch07_fn9">9</a> The anarchist will use power to overthrow the state. This revolutionary power is, however, not thought of as political power, but as the spontaneous revolt of the outraged individual conscience. It does not seek to create a new political society to take the place of the old one, but a moral society from which power, and consequently politics, are completely eliminated. ‘The principles of the Sermon on the Mount’, an English divine recently <a id="page_94"/>remarked, would mean ‘sudden death to civilised society’.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn10" id="ch07_fn10">10</a> The anarchist sets out to destroy ‘civilised society’ in the name of the Sermon on the Mount.</p>
<p class="para">(iii) A third school of thought starts from the same premise of the essential antithesis between morality and politics, but arrives at a totally different conclusion. The injunction of Jesus to ‘render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s’, implies the co-existence of two separate spheres: the political and the moral. But the moral man is under an obligation to assist – or at any rate not to obstruct – the politician in the discharge of his non-moral functions. ‘Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. The powers that be are ordained of God.’ We thus recognize politics as necessary but non-moral. This tradition, which remained dormant throughout the Middle Ages, when the ecclesiastical and the secular authority was theoretically one, was revived by Luther in order to effect his compromise between reformed church and state. Luther ‘turned on the peasants of his day in holy horror when they attempted to transmute the “spiritual” kingdom into an “earthly” one by suggesting that the principles of the gospel had social significance.’<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn11" id="ch07_fn11">11</a> The division of functions between Caesar and God is implicit in the very conception of an ‘established’ church. But the tradition has been more persistent and more effective in Lutheran Germany than anywhere else. ‘We do not consult Jesus’, wrote a German liberal nineteenth-century pastor, ‘when we are concerned with things which belong to the domain of the construction of the state and political economy’;<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn12" id="ch07_fn12">12</a> and Bernhardi declared that ‘Christian morality is personal and social, and in its nature cannot be political’.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn13" id="ch07_fn13">13</a> The same attitude is inherent in the modern theology of Karl Barth, which insists that political and social evils are the necessary product of man’s sinful nature and that human effort to eradicate them is therefore futile; and the doctrine that Christian morality has nothing to do with politics is vigorously upheld by the Nazi régime. This view is basically different from that of the realist who makes morality a function of politics. But in the field of politics it tends to become indistinguishable from realism.</p>
<p class="para">The theory of the divorce between the spheres of politics and morality is superficially attractive, if only because it evades the insoluble problem of finding a moral justification for the use of force.<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn14" id="ch07_fn14">14</a> But it is not ultimately satisfying. Both non-resistance and anarchism are counsels of despair, which appear to find widespread acceptance only where men feel hopeless of achieving anything by political action; and the attempt to keep God and Caesar in watertight compartments runs too much athwart the deep-seated desire of the human mind to reduce its view of the world to some kind of moral order. We are not in the long run satisfied to believe that <a id="page_95"/>what is politically good is morally bad;<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn15" id="ch07_fn15">15</a> and since we can neither moralize power nor expel power from politics, we are faced with a dilemma which cannot be completely resolved. The planes of utopia and of reality never coincide. The ideal cannot be institutionalized, nor the institution idealized. ‘Politics’, writes Dr Niebuhr, ‘will, to the end of history, be an area where conscience and power meet, where the ethical and coercive factors of human life will interpenetrate and work out their tentative and uneasy compromises.’<a class="sup" href="#ch07-fn16" id="ch07_fn16">16</a> The compromises, like solutions of other human problems, will remain uneasy and tentative. But it is an essential part of any compromise that both factors shall be taken into account.</p>
<p class="para">We have now therefore to analyse the part played in international politics by these two cardinal factors: power and morality.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch07-head1">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn1" id="ch07-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Everywhere do I perceive a certain conspiracy of the rich men seeking their own advantage under the name and pretext of the commonwealth’ (More, <span class="italic">Utopia</span>). ‘The exploitation of one part of society by another is common to all past centuries’ (<span class="italic">Communist Manifesto</span>).</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn2" id="ch07-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">A <span class="italic">Defence of Liberty against Tyrants</span> (<span class="italic">Vindiciae contra Tyrannos</span>), ed. Laski, Introd., p. 55.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn3" id="ch07-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Linton, <span class="italic">The Study of Man</span>, p. 240.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn4" id="ch07-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Laski, <span class="italic">A Grammar of Politics</span>, p. 20.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn5" id="ch07-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. Truslow Adams, <span class="italic">The Epic of America</span>, p. 112. The idea that the state has a moral foundation in the consent of its citizens as well as a power foundation was propounded by Locke and Rousseau and popularized by the American and French revolutions. Two recent expressions of the idea may be quoted. The Czecho-Slovak declaration of independence of 18 October 1918 described Austria-Hungary as ‘a state which has no justification for its existence, and which, since it refuses to accept the fundamental basis of modern world-organisation [i.e. self-determination], is only an artificial and unmoral construction’. In February 1938, Hitler told Schuschnigg, the then Austrian Chancellor, that ‘a régime lacking every kind of legality and which in reality ruled only by force, must in the long run come into continually increasing conflict with public opinion’ (speech in the Reichstag of 17 March 1938). Hitler maintained that the two pillars of the state are ‘force’ and ‘popularity’ (<span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 579).</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn6" id="ch07-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Catlin, <span class="italic">The Science and Method of Politics</span>, p. 309.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn7" id="ch07-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It is significant that the word <span class="italic">Realpolitik</span> was coined in the once famous treatise of von Rochau, <span class="italic">Grundsatze der Realpolitik</span> published in 1853, which was largely inspired by the lessons of Frankfort. The inspiration which Hiter’s <span class="italic">Realpolitik</span> has derived from the lessons of the Weimar Republic is obvious.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_96"/><a href="#ch07_fn8" id="ch07-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Winston Churchill, <span class="italic">Arms and the Covenant</span>, p. 368. The argument that power is a necessary motive force for the remedy of ‘just’ grievances is further developed on pp. 209–16.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn9" id="ch07-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bakunin, (<span class="italic">Oeuvres</span>, i. p. 150; cf. vi. p. 17: ‘If there is a devil in all human history, it is this principle of command and authority.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn10" id="ch07-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The Dean of St Paul’s quoted in a leading article in <span class="italic">The Times</span>, 2 August 1937.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn11" id="ch07-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. Niebuhr, <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society</span>, p. 77.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn12" id="ch07-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Quoted in W. F. Bruck, <span class="italic">Social and Economic History of Germany</span>, p. 65.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn13" id="ch07-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Bernhardi, <span class="italic">Germany and the Next War</span> (Engl. transl.), p. 29.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn14" id="ch07-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Force in the right place’, as Mr Maxton once said in the House of Commons, is a meaningless conception, ‘because the right place for me is exactly where I want to use it, and for him also, and for everyone else’ (House of Commons, 7 November 1933: <span class="italic">Official Record</span>, col. 130). Force in politics is always the instrument of some kind of group interest.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn15" id="ch07-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Acton was fond of saying that ‘great men are almost always bad men’, and quotes Walpole’s dictum that ‘no great country was ever saved by good men’ (<span class="italic">History of Freedom</span>, p. 219). Rosebery showed more acuteness when he remarked that ‘there is one question which English people ask about great men: Was he “a good man”?’ (<span class="italic">Napoleon: The Last Phase</span>, p. 364).</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch07_fn16" id="ch07-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td> </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. Niebuhr, <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society</span>, p. 4.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>