<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939</title>
<link href="css/Carr.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:45f90616-1084-4b78-8669-c4d2b19ab5cc" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="chapter" id="ch08">
<p class="chapterNumber"><a id="page_97"/>CHAPTER EIGHT</p>
<p class="chapterTitle">Power in International Politics</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Politics are, then, in one sense always power politics. Common usage applies the term ‘political’ not to all activities of the state, but to issues involving a conflict of power. Once this conflict has been resolved, the issue ceases to be ‘political’ and becomes a matter of administrative routine. Nor is all business transacted between states ‘political’. When states cooperate with one another to maintain postal or transport services, or to prevent the spread of epidemics or suppress the traffic in drugs, these activities are described as ‘non-political’ or ‘technical’. But as soon as an issue arises which involves, or is thought to involve, the power of one state in relation to another, the matter at once becomes ‘political’. While politics cannot be satisfactorily defined exclusively in terms of power, it is safe to say that power is always an essential element of politics. In order to understand a political issue, it is not enough (as it would be in the case of a technical or a legal issue) to know what the point at issue is. It is necessary also to know between whom it has arisen. An issue raised by a small number of isolated individuals is not the same political fact as the same issue raised by a powerful and well-organized trade union. A political issue arising between Great Britain and Japan is something quite different from what may be formally the same issue between Great Britain and Nicaragua. ‘Politics begin where the masses are,’ said Lenin, ‘not where there are thousands, but where there are millions, that is where serious politics begin.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn1" id="ch08_fn1">1</a></p>
<p class="para">There have been periods of history when it might have been superfluous to dwell on this obvious fact, and when Engels’ dictum that ‘without force and iron ruthlessness nothing is achieved in history’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn2" id="ch08_fn2">2</a> would have passed as a platitude. But in the comparatively well-ordered world of nineteenth-century liberalism, subtler forms of compulsion successfully concealed from the unsophisticated the continuous but silent workings of political power; and in democracies, at any rate, this concealment is still partially effective.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn3" id="ch08_fn3">3</a> After the first world war, the liberal tradition was carried into international politics. Utopian writers from the English-speaking countries seriously believed that the establishment of the League of Nations meant the elimination of power from international relations, and the substitution of discussion for armies and <a id="page_98"/>navies. ‘Power politics’ were regarded as a mark of the bad old times, and became a term of abuse. That this belief should have persisted for more than ten years was due to the circumstance that the Great Powers whose main interest was the preservation of the <span class="italic">status quo</span> enjoyed throughout that time a virtual monopoly of power. A game of chess between a world champion and a schoolboy would be so rapidly and so effortlessly won that the innocent onlooker might be pardoned for assuming that little skill was necessary to play chess. In the same way, the simple-minded spectator of the game of international politics could assume, between 1920 and 1931, that power played little part in the game. What was commonly called the ‘return to power politics’ in 1931was, in fact, the termination of the monopoly of power enjoyed by the <span class="italic">status quo</span> Powers. Stalin’s lament that <span class="italic">‘in our days</span> it is not the custom to reckon with the weak’, and Neville Chamberlain’s remark that ‘<span class="italic">in the world as we find it today</span> an unarmed nation has little chance of making its voice heard’,<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn4" id="ch08_fn4">4</a> were curious tributes – more surprising in the professed Marxist than in the inheritor of a British nineteenth-century tradition – to the illusion that there was once a time when weak and unarmed countries played an effective role in international politics.</p>
<p class="para">The assumption of the elimination of power from politics could only result from a wholly uncritical attitude towards political problems. In the affairs of the League of Nations, formal equality and the participation of all in debate did not render the power factor any less decisive. The founders of the League themselves entertained no such illusion. House originally thought that only Great Powers should be admitted to the League at all.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn5" id="ch08_fn5">5</a> In the earliest British and American drafts of the Covenant, it was contemplated that membership of the Council of the League would be limited to Great Powers; and Lord Cecil noted on one of these drafts that ‘the smaller Powers would in any case not exercise any considerable influence’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn6" id="ch08_fn6">6</a> This prevision was fulfilled. An Italian delegate testified that during the long period of his regular attendances at Geneva he ‘never saw a dispute of any importance settled otherwise than by an agreement between the Great Powers’, and that the procedure of the League was ‘a system of detours, all of which lead to one or other of these two issues: agreement or disagreement between Great Britain, Italy, France and Germany’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn7" id="ch08_fn7">7</a> ‘Despite our juridical equality here,’ said Mr De Valera a little later, ‘in matters such as European peace the small states are powerless.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn8" id="ch08_fn8">8</a> The decisions on the application of sanctions against Italy in the winter of 1935–36 were, in effect, taken solely by Great Britain and France, the possessorsofeffectivemilitaryandeconomicpowerintheMediterranean. The minor Powers followed their lead; and one of them was actually ‘compensated’ by Great Britain and France for so doing.</p>
<p class="para"><a id="page_99"/>Nor was it only at Geneva that the weak Powers set their course to match that of the strong. When Great Britain took her currency off the gold standard in September 1931, several minor Powers were obliged to follow her example. When France abandoned the gold standard in September 1936, Switzerland and Holland – the last free gold countries – were compelled to follow suit, and several other smaller countries had to alter the value of their currencies. When France was militarily supreme in Europe in the nineteen-twenties, a number of smaller Powers grouped themselves under her aegis. When German military strength eclipsed that of France, most of these Powers made declarations of neutrality or veered to the side of Germany. The alleged ‘dictatorship of the Great Powers’, which is sometimes denounced by utopian writers as if it were a wicked policy deliberately adopted by certain states, is a fact which constitutes something like a ‘law of nature’ in international politics.</p>
<p class="para">It is necessary at this point to dispel the current illusion that the policy of those states which are, broadly speaking, satisfied with the <span class="italic">status quo</span> and whose watchword is ‘security’, is somehow less concerned with power than the policy of the dissatisfied states, and that the popular phrase ‘power politics’ applies to the acts of the latter but not to those of the former. This illusion, which has an almost irresistible attraction for the publicists of the satisfied Powers, is responsible for much confused thinking about international politics. The pursuit of ‘security’ by satisfied Powers has often been the motive of flagrant examples of power politics. In order to secure themselves against the revenge of a defeated enemy, victorious Powers have in the past resorted to such measures as the taking of hostages, the mutilation or enslavement of males of military age or, in modern times, the dismemberment and occupation of territory or forced disarmament. It is profoundly misleading to represent the struggle between satisfied and dissatisfied Powers as a struggle between morality on one side and power on the other. It is a clash in which, whatever the moral issue, power politics are equally predominant on both sides.</p>
<p class="para">The history of the Locarno Treaty is a simple and revealing illustration of the working of power politics. The first proposal for a treaty guaranteeing Germany’s western frontier was made by Germany in December 1922, and was emphatically rejected by Poincare’. At this period (it was the eve of the Ruhr invasion), Germany had everything to fear from France, and France nothing to fear from a helpless Germany; and the treaty had no attraction for France. Two years later the position had changed. The Ruhr invasion had brought little profit to France, and had left her perplexed as to the next step. Germany might one day be powerful again. Germany, on the other hand, still feared the military supremacy of France, and hankered after a guarantee. It was the psychological moment <a id="page_100"/>when French fear of Germany was about equally balanced by Germany’s fear of France; and a treaty which had not been possible two years before, and would not have been possible five years later, was now welcome to both. Moreover, the power interests of Great Britain coincided with those of Germany. Germany had abandoned hope of securing a revision of her western, but not of her other, frontiers. Great Britain was prepared to guarantee Germany’s western, but not her other, frontiers. Germany, anxious to expedite the withdrawal of the Allied army from the Rhineland, had as yet no hope of breaking down the restrictions imposed by the demilitarization clauses of the Versailles Treaty; and she was therefore quite prepared to purchase the new agreement by reaffirming her acceptance of those clauses and placing them under a guarantee.</p>
<p class="para">Such was the background of the famous Locarno Treaty. Its success was a striking one. For years afterwards, attempts were made to repeat it in other fields. Mediterranean and Eastern European ‘Locarnos’ were canvassed; and their failure to materialize disappointed and puzzled people who believed that international problems everywhere could be solved by devices of the same standard pattern, and who failed to understand that the Locarno Treaty was an expression of the power politics of a particular period and locality. Ten years after its conclusion, the delicate balance on which it rested had disappeared. France feared Germany more than ever. But Germany no longer feared anything from France. The treaty no longer had any meaning for Germany save as an affirmation of the demilitarization clauses of the Versailles Treaty which she could now hope to overthrow. The only part of the Locarno Treaty which still corresponded to the situation of power politics was the British guarantee to France and Belgium. This was repeated by Great Britain after the rest of the treaty had been denounced by Germany. The history of Locarno is a classic instance of power politics. It remains incomprehensible to those who seek uniform a <span class="italic">priori</span> solutions of the problem of security, and regard power politics as an abnormal phenomenon visible only in periods of crisis.</p>
<p class="para">Failure to recognize that power is an essential element of politics has hitherto vitiated all attempts to establish international forms of government, and confused nearly every attempt to discuss the subject. Power is an indispensable instrument of government. To internationalize government in any real sense means to internationalize power; and international government is, in effect, government by that state which supplies the power necessary for the purpose of governing. The international governments set up by the Versailles Treaty in various parts of Europe were temporary in character, and had not therefore to face the problems of a long-term policy. But even these illustrate the intimate connexion between government and power. The Inter-Allied High Commission, <a id="page_101"/>which exercised in the occupied Rhineland such functions of government as were necessary for the security of the Allied troops, worked smoothly so long as British and French policies coincided. When the Ruhr crisis caused a serious difference of opinion between the British and French Governments, French policy was applied in the zones occupied by French and Belgian troops and British policy in the zone occupied by British troops, the policy of the government being determined by the nationality of the power on which it rested. The Inter-Allied Commission appointed to conduct the plebiscite in Upper Silesia pursued the French policy of favouring Poland so long as the Allied troops on which its authority depended were supplied almost exclusively by France. This policy was corrected only when British troops were sent to the area. The effective control of any government depends on the source of its power.</p>
<p class="para">The problem of international government and power was raised in a more acute form by the mandates system and by the proposal frequently put forward that the government of some or all colonial territories shall be ‘internationalized’. We are here faced by an issue of permanent government, involving the formulation of long-term policy, and different in kind from that of temporary international collaboration between allies under stress of war or for the purpose of implementing a treaty jointly imposed. Its nature may be illustrated from the case of Palestine. Policy in Palestine was dependent on the amount of military force available for use there, and had therefore to be determined not by the Mandates Commission, which had no power at its disposal, but by the British Government, which supplies the power; for whatever view might be taken by the Mandates Commission, it was unthinkable that British troops could be used to carry out a policy of which the British Government or the British electorate did not approve.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn9" id="ch08_fn9">9</a> Under any international system of government, policy would depend, at critical moments, on the decision of the state supplying the power on which the authority of the government depended. If, as would almost inevitably happen, the control of an international territory were divided geographically among the forces of different states, the different zones would, in periods of international discord, pursue discordant policies: and the old international rivalries would recur in a new and equally dangerous form. Problems of economic development would be not less baffling. The international administration of colonial areas, wrote Lugard, himself an experienced and enlightened administrator, ‘would paralyse all initiative by the dead hand of a super-bureaucracy devoid of national sentiment and stifling to all patriotism, and would be very disadvantageous to the countries concerned’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn10" id="ch08_fn10">10</a> Any real international government is impossible so long as power, which is an essential condition of government, is organized nationally. The international <a id="page_102"/>secretariat of the League of Nations was able to function precisely because it was a non-political civil service, had no responsibility for policy, and was therefore independent of power.</p>
<p class="para">Political power in the international sphere may be divided, for purposes of discussion, into three categories: (a) military power, (b) economic power, (c) power over opinion. We shall find, however, that these categories are closely interdependent; and though they are theoretically separable, it is difficult in practice to imagine a country for any length of time possessing one kind of power in isolation from the others. In its essence, power is an indivisible whole. ‘The laws of social dynamics’, a recent critic has said, ‘are laws which can only be stated in terms of power, not in terms of this or that form of power.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn11" id="ch08_fn11">11</a></p>
<p class="header1" id="ch08-head1">(a) Military power</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The supreme importance of the military instrument lies in the fact that the <span class="italic">ultima ratio</span> of power in international relations is war. Every act of the state, in its power aspect, is directed to war, not as a desirable weapon, but as a weapon which it may require in the last resort to use. Clausewitz’s famous aphorism that ‘war is nothing but the continuation of political relations by other means’ has been repeated with approval both by Lenin and by the Communist International;<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn12" id="ch08_fn12">12</a> and Hitler meant much the same thing when he said that ‘an alliance whose object does not include the intention to fight is meaningless and useless’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn13" id="ch08_fn13">13</a> In the same sense, Mr Hawtrey defines diplomacy as ‘potential war’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn14" id="ch08_fn14">14</a> These are half-truths. But the important thing is to recognize that they are true. War lurks in the background of international politics just as revolution lurks in the background of domestic politics. There are few European countries where, at some time during the past thirty years, potential revolution has not been an important factor in politics;<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn15" id="ch08_fn15">15</a> and the international community has in this respect the closest analogy to those states where the possibility of revolution is most frequently and most conspicuously present to the mind.</p>
<p class="para">Potential war being thus a dominant factor in international politics, military strength becomes a recognized standard of political values. Every great civilization of the past has enjoyed in its day a superiority of military power. The Greek city-state rose to greatness when its hoplite armies proved more than a match for the Persian hordes. In the modern world, Powers (the word itself is significant enough) are graded according to the quality and the supposed efficiency of the military equipment, including manpower, at their disposal. Recognition as a Great Power is normally the reward of fighting a successful large-scale war. Germany after the Franco-Prussian War, the United States after the war with Spain, and Japan after <a id="page_103"/>the Russo-Japanese War are familiar recent instances. The faint doubt attaching to Italy’s status as a Great Power is partly due to the fact that she has never proved her prowess in a first-class war. Any symptom of military inefficiency or unpreparedness in a Great Power is promptly reflected in its political status. The naval mutiny at Invergordon in September 1931 was the final blow to British prestige which compelled Great Britain to devalue her currency. The execution of the leading Soviet generals for alleged treason in June 1937 was thought to reveal so much weakness in the Soviet military machine that the political influence of Soviet Russia suffered a sudden and severe slump. Statesmen of all the Great Powers periodically make speeches extolling the efficiency of their armies, navies and air forces; and military parades and reviews are organized in order to impress the world with the military strength and consequent political standing of the nation. In international crises, fleets, troops or air squadrons show themselves conspicuously at crucial points for the same purpose.</p>
<p class="para">These facts point to the moral that foreign policy never can, or never should, be divorced from strategy. The foreign policy of a country is limited not only by its aims, but also by its military strength or, more accurately, by the ratio of its military strength to that of other countries. The most serious problem involved in the democratic control of foreign policy is that no government can afford to divulge full and frank information about its own military strength, or all the knowledge it possesses about the military strength of other countries. Public discussions of foreign policy are therefore conducted in partial or total ignorance of one of the factors which must be decisive in determining it. A constitutional rule of long standing precludes private members of Parliament from proposing motions which entail public expenditure. The same restraint might well be exercised in advocating policies which entail risk of war; for only the government and its advisers can assess the chances with anything like complete knowledge of the relevant facts. Many contemporary books and speeches about international politics are reminiscent of those ingenious mathematical problems which the student is invited to solve by ignoring the weight of the elephant. The solutions proposed are neat and accurate on the abstract plane, but are obtained by leaving out of account the vital strategic factor. Even so important, and in many ways so valuable, a work as the annual <span class="italic">Survey of International Affairs</span> frequently soars into the realms of fancy when it embarks on criticism of policy, precisely because it neglects those military limitations which are always present to the minds of those who have to solve problems of foreign policy in real life. If every prospective writer on international affairs in the last twenty years had taken a compulsory <a id="page_104"/>course in elementary strategy, reams of nonsense would have remained unwritten.</p>
<p class="para">Military power, being an essential element in the life of the state, becomes not only an instrument, but an end in itself. Few of the important wars of the last hundred years seem to have been waged for the deliberate and conscious purpose of increasing either trade or territory. The most serious wars are fought in order to make one’s own country militarily stronger or, more often, to prevent another country from becoming militarily stronger, so that there is much justification for the epigram that ‘the principal cause of war is war itself’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn16" id="ch08_fn16">16</a> Every stage of the Napoleonic Wars was devised to prepare the way for the next stage: the invasion of Russia was undertaken in order to make Napoleon strong enough to defeat Great Britain. The Crimean War was waged by Great Britain and France in order to prevent Russia from becoming strong enough to attack their Near Eastern possessions and interests at some future time. The origin of the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–5 is described as follows in a note addressed to the League of Nations by the Soviet Government in 1924: ‘When the Japanese torpedo-boats attacked the Russian fleet at Port Arthur in 1904, it was clearly an act of aggression from a technical point of view, but, politically speaking, it was an act caused by the aggressive policy of the Tsarist Government towards Japan, who, in order to forestall the danger, struck the first blow at her adversary.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn17" id="ch08_fn17">17</a> In 1914, Austria sent an ultimatum to Serbia because she believed that Serbians were planning the downfall of the Dual Monarchy; Russia feared that Austria-Hungary, if she defeated Serbia, would be strong enough to menace her; Germany feared that Russia, if she defeated Austria-Hungary, would be strong enough to menace her; France had long believed that Germany, if she defeated Russia, would be strong enough to menace her, and had therefore concluded the Franco-Russian alliance; and Great Britain feared that Germany, if she defeated France and occupied Belgium, would be strong enough to menace her. Finally, the United States came to fear that Germany, if she won the war, would be strong enough to menace them. Thus the war, in the minds of all the principal combatants, had a defensive or preventive character. They fought in order that they might not find themselves in a more unfavourable position in some future war. Even colonial acquisitions have often been prompted by the same motive. The consolidation and formal annexation of the original British settlements in Australia were inspired by fear of Napoleon’s alleged design to establish French colonies there. Military, rather than economic, reasons dictated the capture of German colonies during the war of 1914 and afterwards precluded their return to Germany.</p>
<p class="para">It is perhaps for this reason that the exercise of power always appears to <a id="page_105"/>beget the appetite for more power. There is, as Dr Niebuhr says, ‘no possibility of drawing a sharp line between the will-to-live and the will-to-power’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn18" id="ch08_fn18">18</a> Nationalism, having attained its first objective in the form of national unity and independence, develops almost automatically into imperialism. International politics amply confirm the aphorisms of Machiavelli that ‘men never appear to themselves to possess securely what they have unless they acquire something further from another’,<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn19" id="ch08_fn19">19</a> and of Hobbes that man ‘cannot assure the power and means to live well which he hath present, without the acquisition of more’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn20" id="ch08_fn20">20</a> Wars, begun for motives of security, quickly become wars of aggression and self-seeking. President McKinley invited the United States to intervene in Cuba against Spain in order ‘to secure a full and final termination of hostilities between the Government of Spain and the people of Cuba and to secure on the island the establishment of a stable government’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn21" id="ch08_fn21">21</a> But by the time the war was over the temptation to self-aggrandizement by the annexation of the Philippines had become irresistible. Nearly every country participating in the first world war regarded it initially as a war of self-defence; and this belief was particularly strong on the Allied side. Yet during the course of the war, every Allied Government in Europe announced war aims which included the acquisition of territory from the enemy Powers. In modern conditions, wars of limited objective have become almost as impossible as wars of limited liability. It is one of the fallacies of the theory of collective security that war can be waged for the specific and disinterested purpose of ‘resisting aggression’. Had the League of Nations in the autumn of 1935, under the leadership of Great Britain, embarked on ‘military sanctions’ against Italy, it would have been impossible to restrict the campaign to the expulsion of Italian troops from Abyssinia. Operations would in all probability have led to the occupation of Italy’s East African colonies by Great Britain and France, of Trieste, Fiume and Albania by Yugoslavia, and of the islands of the Dodecanese by Greece or Turkey or both; and war aims would have been announced, precluding on various specious grounds the restoration of these territories to Italy. Territorial ambitions are just as likely to be the product as the cause of war.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch08-head2">(b) Economic power</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Economic strength has always been an instrument of political power, if only through its association with the military instrument. Only the most primitive kinds of warfare are altogether independent of the economic factor. The wealthiest prince or the wealthiest city-state could hire the largest and most efficient army of mercenaries; and every government was <a id="page_106"/>therefore compelled to pursue a policy designed to further the acquisition of wealth. The whole progress of civilization has been so closely bound up with economic development that we are not surprised to trace, throughout modern history, an increasingly intimate association between military and economic power. In the prolonged conflicts which marked the close of the Middle Ages in Western Europe, the merchants of the towns, relying on organized economic power, defeated the feudal barons, who put their trust in individual military prowess. The rise of modern nations has everywhere been marked by the emergence of a new middle class economically based on industry and trade. Trade and finance were the foundation of the shortlived political supremacy of the Italian cities of the Renaissance and later of the Dutch. The principal international wars of the period from the Renaissance to the middle of the eighteenth century were trade wars (some of them were actually so named). Throughout this period, it was universally held that, since wealth is a source of political power, the state should seek actively to promote the acquisition of wealth; and it was believed that the right way to make a country powerful was to stimulate production at home, to buy as little as possible from abroad, and to accumulate wealth in the convenient form of precious metals. Those who argued in this way afterwards came to be known as mercantilists. Mercantilism was a system of economic policy based on the hitherto unquestioned assumption that to promote the acquisition of wealth was part of the normal function of the state.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head3">The separation of economics from politics</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> doctrine of the classical economists made a frontal attack on this assumption. The principal implications of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> have already been discussed. Its significance in the present context is that it brought about a complete theoretical divorce between economics and politics. The classical economists conceived a natural economic order with laws of its own, independent of politics and functioning to the greatest profit of all concerned when political authority interfered least in its automatic operation. This doctrine dominated the economic thought, and to some extent the economic practice (though far more in Great Britain than elsewhere), of the nineteenth century. The theory of the nineteenth-century liberal state presupposed the existence side by side of two separate systems. The political system, which was the sphere of government, was concerned with the maintenance of law and order and the provision of certain essential services, and was thought of mainly as a necessary evil. The economic system, which was the preserve of private enterprise, catered for the material wants and, in doing so, organized the everyday lives of the <a id="page_107"/>great mass of the citizens.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn22" id="ch08_fn22">22</a> In current English theory, the doctrine of the separation of politics and economics was sometimes carried to astonishing lengths. ‘Is it true’, asked Sir Normal Angell shortly before the first world war, ‘that wealth and prosperity and well-being depend on the political power of nations, or indeed that one has anything whatever to do with the other?’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn23" id="ch08_fn23">23</a> And the whole argument depends on the confident assumption that every intelligent reader will answer in the negative. As late as 1915, an English philosopher detected ‘an ineradicable tendency that, as wealth and its control and enjoyment go to the productive class, so power and prestige go to the professional class’, and regarded this separation of economic from political power as not only ineradicable but ‘essential to a decent society’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn24" id="ch08_fn24">24</a></p>
<p class="para">Even before 1900, a more penetrating analysis might have shown that the illusion of a divorce between politics and economics was fast breaking down. It is still open to debate whether late nineteenth-century imperialism should be regarded as an economic movement using political weapons, or as a political movement using economic weapons. But that economics and politics marched hand in hand towards the same objective is clear enough. ‘Is it not precisely the hallmark of British statesmanship’, asked Hitler, ‘to draw economic advantages from political strength, and to transform every economic gain back into political power?’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn25" id="ch08_fn25">25</a> The first world war, by overtly reuniting economics and politics, in both domestic and foreign policy, hastened a development which was already on the way. It was now revealed that the nineteenth century, while purporting to take economics altogether out of the political sphere, had in fact forged economic weapons of unparalleled strength for use in the interests of national policy. A German staff officer had remarked to Engels in the 1880s that ‘the basis of warfare is primarily the general economic life of peoples’;<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn26" id="ch08_fn26">26</a> and this diagnosis was amply confirmed by the experiences of 1914–18. In no previous war had the economic life of belligerent nations been so completely and ruthlessly organized by the political authority. In the age-long alliance between the military and the economic arm, the economic arm for the first time was an equal, if not a superior, partner. To cripple the economic system of an enemy Power was as much a war aim as to defeat his armies and fleets. ‘Planned economy’, which means the control by the state for political purposes of the economic life of the nation, was a development of the first world war.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn27" id="ch08_fn27">27</a> ‘War potential’ has become another name for economic power.</p>
<p class="para">We have now therefore returned, after the important, but abnormal, <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> interlude of the nineteenth century, to the position where economics can be frankly recognized as a part of politics. We can thus resolve the controversy, which is in large part a product of nineteenth-century ideas and terminology, about the so-called economic interpretation <a id="page_108"/>of history. Marx was overwhelmingly right when he insisted on the increasing importance of the role played by economic forces in politics; and since Marx, history can never be written again exactly as it was written before him. But Marx believed, just as firmly as did the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> liberal, in an economic system with laws of its own working independently of the state, which was its adjunct and its instrument. In writing as if economics and politics were separate domains, one subordinate to the other, Marx was dominated by nineteenth-century presuppositions in much the same way as his more recent opponents who are equally sure that ‘the primary laws of history are political laws, economic laws are secondary’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn28" id="ch08_fn28">28</a> Economic forces are in fact political forces. Economics can be treated neither as a minor accessory of history, nor as an independent science in the light of which history can be interpreted. Much confusion would be saved by a general return to the term ‘political economy’, which was given the new science by Adam Smith himself and not abandoned in favour of the abstract ‘economics’, even in Great Britain itself, till the closing years of the nineteenth century.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn29" id="ch08_fn29">29</a> The science of economics presupposes a given political order, and cannot be profitably studied in isolation from politics.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head4">Some fallacies of the separation of economics from politics</p>
<p class="NoIndent">It would have been unnecessary to dwell at length on this point if its importance had been either purely historical or purely theoretical. The illusion of a separation between politics and economics – a belated legacy of the <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> nineteenth century – had ceased to correspond to any aspect of current reality. But it continued to persist in thought about international politics, where it created no little confusion. An immense amount of discussion was devoted to the meaningless question whether (as the Economic Conference of 1927 supposed)<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn30" id="ch08_fn30">30</a> our political troubles have economic causes or whether (as the Van Zeeland report suggested)<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn31" id="ch08_fn31">31</a> our economic troubles have political causes, and to the equally meaningless conundrum whether the problem of raw materials is political or economic. Similar confusion was produced by the declaration of the British Government in 1922 that the rate of Jewish immigration into Palestine would be determined by ‘the economic capacity of the country’, supplemented in I93I by the further statement that ‘the considerations relevant to the limits <a id="page_109"/>of absorptive capacity are purely economic considerations’. It was not until 1937 that a Royal Commission discovered that ‘since Arabs are hostile to Jewish immigration, the factor of “hostility between the two peoples” necessarily assumes immediate economic importance’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn32" id="ch08_fn32">32</a> Indeed every issue of migration and refugees has been complicated by the supposition that there is some objective economic test of absorptive capacity. The conflict between two opposite and equally defensible interpretations of the promise in the Treaty of Neuilly ‘to ensure the economic outlets of Bulgaria to the Aegean Sea’ was another instance of confusion arising from the too light-hearted use of this elusive word. Attempts to solve international problems by the application of economic principles divorced from politics are doomed to sterility.</p>
<p class="para">The most conspicuous practical failure caused by the persistence of this nineteenth-century illusion was the breakdown of League sanctions in 1936. Careful reading of the text of Article 16 of the Covenant acquits its framers of responsibility for the mistake. Paragraph 1 prescribes the economic weapons, paragraph 2 the military weapons, to be employed against the violator of the Covenant. Paragraph 2 is clearly complementary to paragraph 1, and assumes as a matter of course that, in the event of an application of sanctions, ‘armed forces’ would be required ‘to protect the Covenants of the League’. The only difference between the two paragraphs is that, whereas all members of the League would have to apply the economic weapons, it would be natural to draw the necessary armed forces from those members which possessed them in sufficient strength and in reasonable geographical proximity to the offender.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn33" id="ch08_fn33">33</a> Subsequent commentators, obsessed with the assumption that economics and politics were separate and separable things, evolved the doctrine that paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 16 were not complementary, but alternative, the difference being that ‘economic sanctions’ were obligatory and ‘military sanctions’ optional. This doctrine was eagerly seized on by the many who felt that the League might conceivably be worth a few million pounds’ worth of trade, but not a few million human lives; and in the famous 1934 Peace Ballot in Great Britain, some two million deluded voters expressed simultaneously their approval of economic, and their disapproval of military, sanctions. ‘One of the many conclusions to which I have been drawn’, said Lord Baldwin at this time, ‘is that there is no such thing as a sanction which will work, which does not mean war.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn34" id="ch08_fn34">34</a> But the bitter lesson of 1935–36 was needed to drive home the truth that in sanctions, as in war, the only motto is ‘all or nothing’, and that economic power is impotent if the military weapon is not held in readiness to support it.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn35" id="ch08_fn35">35</a> Power is indivisible; and the military and economic weapons are merely different instruments of power.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn36" id="ch08_fn36">36</a></p>
<p class="para">A different, and equally serious, form in which this illusory separation of politics and economics can be traced is the popular phraseology which distinguishes between ‘power’ and ‘welfare’, between ‘guns’ and ‘butter’. ‘Welfare arguments are “economic”,’ remarks an American writer, ‘power arguments are “political”.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn37" id="ch08_fn37">37</a> This fallacy is particularly difficult to expose because it appears to be deducible from a familiar fact. Every modern <a id="page_110"/>government and every parliament is continually faced with the dilemma of spending money on armaments or social services; and this encourages the illusion that the choice really lies between ‘power’ and ‘welfare’, between political guns and economic butter. Reflexion shows, however, that this is not the case. The question asked never takes the form, Do you prefer guns or butter? For everyone (except a handful of pacifists in those Anglo-Saxon countries which have inherited a long tradition of uncontested security) agrees that, in case of need, guns must come before butter. The question asked is always either, Have we already sufficient guns to enable us to afford some butter? or, Granted that we need x guns, can we increase revenue sufficiently to afford more butter as well? But the neatest exposure of this fallacy comes from the pen of Professor Zimmern; and the exposure is none the less effective for being unconscious. Having divided existing states on popular lines into those which pursue ‘welfare’ and those which pursue ‘power’, Professor Zimmern revealingly adds that ‘the welfare states, taken together, enjoy a preponderance of power and resources over the power states’,<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn38" id="ch08_fn38">38</a> thereby leading us infallibly to the correct conclusion that ‘welfare states’ are states which, already enjoying a preponderance of power, are not primarily concerned to increase it, and can therefore afford butter, and ‘power states’ those which, being inferior in power, are primarily concerned to increase it, and devote the major part of their resources to this end. In this popular terminology, ‘welfare states’ are those which possess preponderant power, and ‘power states’ those which do not. Nor is this classification as illogical as it may seem. Every Great Power takes the view that the minimum number of guns necessary to assert the degree of power which it considers requisite takes precedence over butter, and that it can only pursue ‘welfare’ when this minimum has been achieved. For many years prior to 1933, Great Britain, being satisfied with her power, was a ‘welfare state’. After 1935, feeling her power contested and inadequate, she became a ‘power state’; and even the Opposition ceased to press with any insistence the prior claim of the social services. The contrast is not one between ‘power’ and ‘welfare’, and still less between ‘politics’ and ‘economics’, but between different degrees of power. In the pursuit of power, military and economic instruments will both be used.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head5">Autarky</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Having thus established that economics must properly be regarded as an aspect of politics, we may divide into two broad categories the methods by which economic power is pressed into the service of national policy. The first will contain those measures whose purpose is defined by the <a id="page_111"/>convenient word autarky; the second, economic measures directly designed to strengthen the national influence over other countries.</p>
<p class="para">Autarky, or self-sufficiency, was one of the aims of the mercantilist policy, and has indeed been pursued by states from the earliest times. But the problem of autarky is nevertheless distinctively modern. In the Middle Ages, autarky was a natural and necessary condition of economic life; for the long-distance transport of any goods other than those of small bulk and great value was unremunerative. From the close of the Middle Ages, transport gradually became safer, cheaper and more rapid. Countries became less completely self-dependent; and a rising standard of life was based in part on the international exchange of specialized products. But it is only within the last hundred years that the coming of steam has made transport by land and sea so rapid and cheap that the cost of transport of most commodities is now insignificant in relation to the cost of production, and it is in many cases immaterial whether an article is produced 500 or 5000 miles from the point where it will be used or consumed. Mass-production methods, under which commodities become cheaper the more of them are produced in the same place, have further promoted concentration. Not only are our needs today more highly specialized than ever before, but we live in a world where, for the first time in history, it might, from the standpoint of cost, be possible – and perhaps even desirable – to grow all the wheat consumed by the human race in Canada, and all the wool in Australia, to manufacture all the motor cars in Detroit and all the cotton clothing in England or Japan. Internationally, the consequences of absolute <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> are as fantastic and as unacceptable as are the consequences of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> within the state. In modern conditions the artificial promotion of some degree of autarky is a necessary condition of orderly social existence.</p>
<p class="para">Autarky is, however, not only a social necessity, but an instrument of political power. It is primarily a form of preparedness for war. In the mercantilist period, it was commonly asserted, both in Britain and elsewhere, that the <a id="page_112"/>military power of the state depended on the production of manufactured goods. Adam Smith made his famous exceptions to the doctrine of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> when he approved of the British Navigation Act and the bounties on British sail-cloth and British gunpowder. But the principle of autarky received its classic definition from the pen of Alexander Hamilton, who in 1791, being then Secretary of the United States Treasury, made a report to the House of Representatives which enunciates, in words which might have been written to-day, the whole modern doctrine of autarky. Hamilton had been instructed to advise on ‘the means of promoting such [manufactures] as will tend to render the United States independent of foreign nations for military and other essential supplies’. One short passage may be quoted from the report:</p>
<p class="extract">Not only the wealth but the independence and security of a country appear to be materially connected with the prosperity of manufactures. Every nation, with a view to these great objects, ought to endeavour to possess within itself all the essentials of national supply. . . . The extreme embarrassments of the United States during the late war, from an incapacity of supplying themselves, are still a matter of keen recollection; a future war might be expected to exemplify the mischief and dangers of a situation to which that capacity is still, in too great a degree, applicable, unless changed by timely and vigorous action.</p>
<p class="NoIndent">And Hamilton went on to examine in turn all the methods by which the desired result might be attained – duties, prohibitions, bounties and premiums.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn39" id="ch08_fn39">39</a> In Germany, just fifty years later, List argued that ‘on the development of the German protective system depend the existence, the independence and the future of the German nationality’;<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn40" id="ch08_fn40">40</a> and in the latter half of the nineteenth century successive Prussian victories drove home the intimate connexion between a highly developed industrial system and military power.</p>
<p class="para">Throughout this period Great Britain, in virtue of her industrial supremacy, enjoyed virtually complete autarky in all industrial products, though not in the raw materials required to produce them. In food supplies, she ceased to be self-supporting about 1830. But this defect was in large part remedied by her naval power, the maintenance of which became one of her chief preoccupations. A Royal Commission on the Supply of Food and Raw Materials in Time of War, which reported in 1905, discussed, but rejected, plans for the precautionary storage in Great Britain of reserve supplies, and did not even discuss any plan for encouraging home production. Complete reliance was placed on the capacity of the navy to protect the ordinary channels of trade, and thereby make up for the inevitable absence of sufficient supplies at home.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn41" id="ch08_fn41">41</a> The now current view that nineteenth-century statesmen were not alive to the political desirability of autarky, or of some adequate substitute for it, is not borne out by facts.</p>
<p class="para">The effect of the first world war on the whole concept of economics has already been discussed. The impulse which it gave to the pursuit of autarky was immediate and powerful. Blockade, and the diversion of a large part of the world’s shipping to the transport of troops and munitions, imposed more or less stringent measures of autarky on both belligerents and neutrals. For four years, the Central Powers were <a id="page_113"/>compelled to depend exclusively on their own resources, and to realize in spite of themselves Fichte’s ideal of <span class="italic">The Closed Commercial State</span>. Even for the Allied Powers, the new weapon of the submarine made reliance on overseas imports as an alternative to autarky more precarious than it had hitherto been supposed. Nor did the Allied Governments, at any rate, appear to regard autarky as a regrettable and temporary expedient. In June I9I6, they met in Paris to discuss postwar economic policy, and decided ‘to take the necessary steps without delay to render themselves independent of the enemy countries in so far as regards the raw materials and manufactured articles essential to their normal economic activities’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn42" id="ch08_fn42">42</a> In the following year, a British Royal Commission drew up a list of articles in respect of which it had been established ‘that the possibility of economic pressure from foreign countries controlling supplies of raw materials requires especially to be guarded against, and that government action is most needed in order to promote economic independence’; and this policy was carried into effect in the Safeguarding of Industries Act of 1921. Where home supplies were not available, the unfettered control of overseas supplies became a primary objective. The desire to control adequate supplies of oil inspired an active British policy in more than one oil-producing country.</p>
<p class="para">Internationally, the important part played by the blockade in winning the war made inevitable the prominence of ‘economic sanctions’ in the constitution of the League of Nations. It was clear that blockade was likely to be applied more vigorously than ever in another war; and autarky was developed as the natural defensive armament against the weapon of blockade. The actual use of this weapon against Italy in I93S added point to the moral. ‘November 18, 1935, marks the starting point of a new chapter in Italian history,’ said Mussolini to the National Guild Assembly on 23 March 1936. ‘. . . The new phase of Italian history will be determined by this postulate: to secure within the briefest time possible the greatest possible measure of economic independence.’ There was, in fact, little novelty in this doctrine, which was merely a paraphrase of what had been said by Hamilton, by List, and by the British Royal Commission of 1917. But the growing international tension threw the problem into sharp relief. A well-known American publicist urged the joint buying by Great Britain and the United States of ‘metals of strategic importance’ with the object of ‘removing the great bulk of these important metals from the markers in which the dictatorial and “have-not” Powers must buy them’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn43" id="ch08_fn43">43</a> ‘No measure’, added a British writer, ‘would do more to weaken a German rearmament programme than a British decision to purchase the entire available output of Swedish ore.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn44" id="ch08_fn44">44</a> It scarcely required such warnings to convince governments of the military value of autarky. <a id="page_114"/>The development of synthetic materials by Germany and the accumulation by Great Britain of stocks of foodstuffs and essential raw materials were two of many significant symptoms. Autarky, like other elements of power, is expensive. It may cost a country as much to make itself self-supporting in some important commodity as to build a battleship. The expenditure may turn out to be wasteful, and the acquisition not worth the cost. But to deny that autarky is an element of power, and as such desirable, is to obscure the issue.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head6">Economic power as an instrument of policy</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The second use of the economic weapon as an instrument of national policy, i.e. its use to acquire power and influence abroad, has been so fully recognized and freely discussed that the briefest summary will suffice here. It takes two principal forms: (a) the export of capital, and (b) the control of foreign markets.</p>
<p class="para">(<span class="italic">a</span>) The export of capital has in recent times been a familiar practice of powerful states. The political supremacy of Great Britain throughout the nineteenth century was closely associated with London’s position as the financial centre of the world. Only in Europe, where Great Britain did not aspire to political influence, were British investments insignificant, amounting to not more than S per cent of all British capital invested abroad. The rise of the United States to political power in the present century was largely due to their appearance in the market as a large-scale lender, first of all, to Latin America, and since 1914, to Europe. The attainment of political objectives by direct government investment occurred in such cases as the purchase by the British Government of shares in the Suez Canal Company and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, or the construction of the Chinese Eastern Railway with Russian Government capital. More often, governments used their power to stimulate investments by banks and private individuals in the interests of national policy. Thus the Franco-Russian alliance was cemented by some £400,000,000 of French capital lent by French investors to the Russian Government. In Germany, ‘the joint-stock bank was not merely a credit organization, but a politico-economic instrument; it was an instrument of Germany’s power policy’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn45" id="ch08_fn45">45</a> The whole policy of nineteenth-century imperialism was based on the development of the backward parts of the world through investment of European capital. Political interests were furthered by private investors enjoying, like the chartered companies of the nineteenth century, government patronage or, more commonly, diplomatic support.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn46" id="ch08_fn46">46</a> Marx described the policy as one of replacing ‘the feudal method of waging war . . . by the mercantile method, cannon by <a id="page_115"/>capital’;<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn47" id="ch08_fn47">47</a> and a new and expressive phrase was coined to describe the ‘dollar diplomacy’ of the United States.</p>
<p class="extract">The diplomacy of the present administration [said Taft in 1912] has sought to respond to the modern ideas of commercial intercourse. This policy has been characterised as substituting dollars for bullets. It is one that appeals alike to idealistic humanitarian sentiments, to the dictates of sound policy and strategy, and to legitimate commercial aims.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn48" id="ch08_fn48">48</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The frequent appearances of the American fleet in Latin American waters (like those of the British fleet elsewhere) showed, moreover, that, if dollars were a humanitarian substitute for bullets, they could and would be reinforced by bullets in case of political need.</p>
<p class="para">The diminished use after 1919 of capital investment abroad as an instrument of policy was explained by the rapid falling-off in the accumulation of surplus capital throughout the world and the insolvency of many potential borrowers. But numerous familiar examples may still be cited. France strengthened her influence over Poland and the Little Entente by abundant loans and credits, public and private, to these countries. Several governments granted or guaranteed loans to Austria for the political purpose of maintaining Austria’s independence; and in 1931 French financial pressure obliged Austria to abandon the project of a customs union between Austria and Germany. The rapid decline of French influence in Central Europe after 1931 was closely connected with the fact that France, since the crisis, was unable to continue her policy of financial assistance to these countries. When in December 1938 it was announced that the French Schneider-Creusot group had sold its interest in the Skoda works to a Czecho-Slovak group representing the Czecho-Slovak Government, a correspondent of <span class="italic">The Times</span> commented that ‘this transaction is another indication of France’s retreat from Central Europe, and puts an end to a chapter of French political expansion’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn49" id="ch08_fn49">49</a> After 1932, when an unofficial embargo was placed on the issue of foreign loans in the British market, it could fairly be said that Great Britain’s foreign lending was subject to political supervision. The years 1938 and 1939 saw the grant to Turkey by Great Britain and Germany, and to China by the United States and Great Britain, of ‘commercial’ credits whose political motive was scarcely disguised.</p>
<p class="para">(<span class="italic">b</span>) The struggle to control foreign markets provides a further illustration of the interaction of politics and economics; for it is often impossible to decide whether political power is being used to acquire markets for the sake of their economic value, or whether markets are being sought in order to establish and strengthen political power. The struggle for markets has been the most characteristic feature of the economic warfare of the <a id="page_116"/>period between the two world wars. It would be wrong to attribute exclusively to political rivalries the intensified pressure to export which manifested itself everywhere. Under the modern structure of industry, the most economical scale of production of many commodities exceeds the consumption capacity of most national markets; and to sell dear in a protected home market and cheap in a free foreign market (which is the essence of ‘dumping’) may be perfectly sound policy from the purely commercial standpoint. Yet the use of dumping as an instrument of policy is incontestable; and powerful countries found their ‘natural’ markets in areas where their political interests lay and where their political influence could be most readily asserted. The principal reason why Central and South-Eastern Europe were Germany’s ‘natural’ markets was their accessibility to Germany’s military power. German rearmament and German economic penetration of these areas proceeded simultaneously. This was, however, not a new phenomenon. An admirable example of the intertwining of political and economic power may be found in the British position in Egypt. British economic penetration in Egypt in the last two decades of the nineteenth century resulted from British military occupation, which was designed to protect British interests in the Suez Canal, which had been acquired to protect British trade routes and strategic lines of communication.</p>
<p class="para">The methods used to encourage exports and capture foreign markets are too familiar to need discussion. The simplest of all is the granting of loans or credits to finance exports. Before 1914 Great Britain was so little preoccupied with the problem of markets that loans obtained in London by foreign borrowers were free of any condition as to where the proceeds should be spent. Foreign loans obtained elsewhere frequently carried the condition that the whole or part of the proceeds should be expended by the borrower in the lending country.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn50" id="ch08_fn50">50</a> Since 1919 this condition has been almost universally applied. In Great Britain, two governmental institutions – the Colonial Development Fund and the Export Credits Guarantee Department – were engaged in financing British exports, the first to the Empire, the second to foreign countries. Before 1939, the operations of the Export Credits Guarantee Department were officially described as being of a purely commercial character. But by an act passed in 1939, the limit of the guarantees which might be given by the Department was increased, and a sum of £10,000,000 was earmarked for the guaranteeing of transactions ‘in connection with which it appears to them [i.e. the Board of Trade] expedient in the national interest that guarantees should be given’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn51" id="ch08_fn51">51</a> In introducing this measure into the House of Commons, the President of the Board of Trade denied the suggestion that Great Britain ‘had declared a trade war upon Germany’, but described the measure as <a id="page_117"/>one of ‘economic rearmament’ and added that ‘the economic rearmament which we are trying now to undertake is exactly like our other rearmament’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn52" id="ch08_fn52">52</a> In July 1939, the amount of £I0,000,000 was increased to £60,000,000. Export bounties and currency manipulation are merely indirect forms of export credits.</p>
<p class="para">The most characteristic modern method of acquiring markets and the political power which goes with them is, however, the reciprocal trade agreement – the return to a system of thinly disguised barter. Thus British purchases of meat and cereals in the Argentine and of bacon and butter in Denmark and the Baltic States secured markets in those countries for British coal and British manufactures. The Ottawa Agreements were a slightly more complicated variation on the same theme. In the Central European and Balkan countries Germany, by purchasing local products (mainly cereals and tobacco) for which no other lucrative outlet could be found, secured not only a market for German goods, but a sphere of political influence. One of the symptoms of the artificial character of French political influence in this region was failure to secure any substantial share in its trade. Purchasing power had become an international asset; and the fact that price was no longer the dominant factor (Germany made most of her purchases in South-Eastern Europe at rates above world prices) put the purchaser and not the producer in a position to call the tune. A new power has thus been placed in the hands of countries with a large population and a high standard of living. But it is a wasting asset which, if used to excess, tends to destroy itself.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head7">Economic power and international morality</p>
<p class="NoIndent">One concluding reflexion may round off this summary sketch of the use of the economic weapon as an instrument of political power. The substitution of the economic weapon for the military weapon – what Marx calls the replacement of cannon by capital – is a symptom not so much of superior morality as of superior strength. This can be seen from a few simple examples. Great Britain, aggrieved by the trial of the Metro-Vickers engineers in Moscow, could obtain satisfaction by imposing an embargo on Soviet imports. Italy, aggrieved by the murder of an Italian officer, could not avail herself of this economic expedient (for an Italian embargo on Greek imports would have been negligible); she could obtain satisfaction only by the brutal military method of bombarding Corfu. In 1931, Great Britain established what came to be known as a ‘sterling <span class="italic">bloc</span>’ by methods which were non-political and in appearance largely fortuitous. Germany, in order to establish an equivalent ‘mark <span class="italic">bloc</span>’ in Central and South-Eastern Europe, had to resort to methods which were frankly political and included <a id="page_118"/>the use and threatened use of force. British economic and financial strength enabled Great Britain to refrain from intervention in the Spanish civil war. The British Government relied on ‘sterling bullets’ to prevent the permanent predominance of Germany and Italy in Spain, whatever the issue of the war. As regards the Far East, the Prime Minister in the same period remarked that ‘when the war is over, and the reconstruction of China begins, she cannot possibly be reconstructed without some help from this country’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn53" id="ch08_fn53">53</a> The growing strength of the United States in international trade and finance was one, at any rate, of the reasons which allowed the United States Government to abandon its traditional practice of landing marines in the territory of recalcitrant Latin American republics and to adopt the ‘good neighbour’ policy.</p>
<p class="para">The point, however, has a wider application to the whole problem of ‘aggression’ and territorial annexation. One of the most revealing documents on this aspect of power is a despatch from the Russian Chargé d’Affaires in Peking to the Russian Government in 1910:</p>
<p class="extract">Should we be sufficiently powerful economically [wrote this frank diplomat], it would be simpler to direct all our efforts to the conclusion of an economic treaty. If, however, as I fear, we should by so doing only be of service to foreigners and ourselves be unable to secure any profits from what had been achieved (thus we have for instance in reality been unable to profit by the extraordinary advantages embodied in the commercial treaty of 1881), then there is, in my opinion, no reason to depart from the basis of policy we have followed hitherto, that of territorial acquisition.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn54" id="ch08_fn54">54</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">A recent British writer on the Far East has made a similar observation:</p>
<p class="extract">Free Trade, as championed by England in the nineteenth century, was the cause of the stronger in purely commercial competition. The ‘sphere of influence’ with its special rights was the objective of states which sought to compensate for weakness in such competition by the direct application of political power.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn55" id="ch08_fn55">55</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">Great Britain’s unchallenged naval and economic supremacy throughout the nineteenth century enabled her to establish a commanding position in China with a minimum of military force and of economic discrimination. A relatively weak Power like Russia could only hope to achieve a comparable result by naked aggression and annexation. Japan afterwards learned the same lesson. In his well-known memorandum of January 1907, Crowe argued that Great Britain was ‘the natural protector of the weaker communities’, and that by her free-trade policy of an open market ‘she <a id="page_119"/>undoubtedly strengthens her hold on the interested friendship of other nations’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn56" id="ch08_fn56">56</a> The argument might have been developed by adding that Great Britain, in virtue of her inherent economic strength and the free-trade policy made possible by it, was able to exercise in many countries a measure of indirect influence and control which no other Power could have achieved without interference with the political independence of the countries concerned, and that this advantage made it as natural for Great Britain, as it would have been difficult for others, to appear as a champion of the political independence of small nations. In Egypt, Great Britain has reconciled her military and economic predominance with the formal independence of the country, where a weaker Power would have had to resort to annexation to obtain a similar effect. Great Britain was able to abandon her formal authority over Iraq and to maintain her interests there, while France shrank from the same step in Syria. The economic weapon is pre-eminently the weapon of strong Powers. It is significant that a proposal made by the Soviet Government in 1931 for a pact of ‘economic non-aggression’ was received with the greatest hostility by the three most powerful countries of the day: Great Britain, France and the United States.</p>
<p class="para">Nevertheless, it is perhaps difficult to dismiss as unfounded the common view that the use of the economic weapon is less immoral than the use of the military weapon. This may not always be true. Blockade in time of war may cause as much suffering as a series of air raids. But generally speaking, there is a sense in which dollars are more humane than bullets even if the end pursued be the same. It is less immoral to place an embargo on Soviet imports than to bombard Greeks. It cannot be reasonably doubted that a form of economic control (such as that of the United States in Central America) which preserves a measure of political independence is more acceptable to subordinate nations, and therefore less immoral, than direct political control (such as that established by Germany in I939 in Bohemia and Moravia). The distinction is not entirely removed by pointing out that the United States, if she were economically as weak as Germany, might well have taken the same course. It is true that the poor are more likely to steal than the rich, and that this affects our moral judgment of individual cases of theft. But theft is generally recognized as <span class="italic">per se</span> immoral. This is merely an illustration of the way in which morality itself is involved in questions of power.</p>
<p class="para">The moral issue will require consideration later. For the present, the most important lesson to be drawn in this field is the illusory character of the popular distinction between economic and military power. Power, which is an element of all political action, is one and indivisible. It uses military and economic weapons for the same ends. The strong will tend to prefer the minor and more ‘civilized’ weapon, because it will generally <a id="page_120"/>suffice to achieve his purposes; and as long as it will suffice, he is under no temptation to resort to the more hazardous military weapon. But economic power cannot be isolated from military power, nor military from economic. They are both integral parts of political power; and in the long run one is helpless without the other.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch08-head8">(c) Power over opinion</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Power over opinion is the third form of power. The ‘Jingoes’ who sang ‘We’ve got the ships, we’ve got the men, we’ve got the money too’ had accurately diagnosed the three essential elements of political power: armaments, manpower and economic power. But manpower is not reckoned by mere counting of heads. ‘The Soldan of Egypt or the Emperor of Rome’, as Hume remarked, ‘might drive his harmless subjects like brute beasts against their sentiments and inclinations. But he must at least have led his <span class="italic">mamelukes</span> or pretorian bands like men by their opinions.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn57" id="ch08_fn57">57</a> Power over opinion is therefore not less essential for political purposes than military and economic power, and has always been closely associated with them. The art of persuasion has always been a necessary part of the equipment of political leader. Rhetoric has a long and honoured record in the annals of statesmanship. But the popular view which regards propaganda as a distinctively modern weapon is, none the less, substantially correct.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head9">Propaganda in the modern world</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The most obvious reason for the increasing prominence attached to power over opinion in recent times is the broadening of the basis of politics, which has vastly increased the number of those whose opinion is politically important. Until comparatively modern times, those whose opinion it was worth while to influence were few in number, united by close ties of interest and, generally speaking, highly educated; and the means of persuasion were correspondingly limited. ‘Scientific exposition’, in Hitler’s words, is for the intelligentsia. The modern weapon of propaganda is for the masses.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn58" id="ch08_fn58">58</a> Christianity seems to have been the first great movement in history with a mass appeal. Appropriately enough, it was the Catholic church which first understood and developed the potentialities of power over large masses of opinion. The Catholic church in the Middle Ages was – and has, within the limits of its power, remained – an institution for diffusing certain opinions and extirpating other opinions contrary to them: it created the first censorship and the first propaganda organization. There is much point in the remark of a recent historian that the mediaeval church was the first totalitarian state.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn59" id="ch08_fn59">59</a> The Reformation was a movement which <a id="page_121"/>simultaneously deprived it, in several parts of Europe, of its power over opinion, of its wealth and of the authority which the military power of the Empire had conferred on it.</p>
<p class="para">The problem of power over opinion in its modern mass form has been created by developments in economic and military technique – by the substitution of mass-production industries for individual craftsmanship and of the conscript citizen army for the volunteer professional force. Contemporary politics are vitally dependent on the opinion of large masses of more or less politically conscious people, of whom the most vocal, the most influential and the most accessible to propaganda are those who live in and around great cities. The problem is one which no modern government ignores. In appearance, the attitude adopted towards it by democracies and by totalitarian states is diametrically opposed. Democracies purport to follow mass opinion; totalitarian states set a standard and enforce conformity to it. In practice, the contrast is less clear cut. Totalitarian states, in determining their policy, profess to express the will of the masses; and the profession is not wholly vain. Democracies, or the groups which control them, are not altogether innocent of the arts of moulding and directing mass opinion. Totalitarian propagandists, whether Marxist or Fascist, continually insist on the illusory character of the freedom of opinion enjoyed in democratic countries. There remains a solid substratum of difference between the attitude of democracies and totalitarian states towards mass opinion, which may prove a decisive factor in times of crisis. But both agree in recognizing its paramount importance.</p>
<p class="para">The same economic and social conditions which have made mass opinion supremely important in politics have also created instruments of unparalleled range and efficiency for moulding and directing it. The oldest, and still perhaps the most powerful, of these instruments is universal popular education. The state which provides the education necessarily determines its content. No state will allow its future citizens to imbibe in its schools teaching subversive of the principles on which it is based. In democracies, the child is taught to prize the liberties of democracy; in totalitarian states, to admire the strength and discipline of totalitarianism. In both, he is taught to respect the traditions and creeds and institutions of his own country, and to think it better than any other. The influence of this early unconscious moulding is difficult to exaggerate. Marx’s dictum that ‘the worker has no country’ has ceased to be true since the worker has passed through national schools.</p>
<p class="para">But when we speak of propaganda to-day, we think mainly of those other instruments whose use popular education has made possible: the radio, the film and the popular press. The radio, the film and the press <a id="page_122"/>share to the fullest extent the characteristic attribute of modern industry, i.e. that mass-production, quasi-monopoly and standardization are a condition of economical and efficient working. Their management has, in the natural course of development, become concentrated in fewer and fewer hands; and this concentration facilitates and makes inevitable the centralized control of opinion. The mass-production of opinion is the corollary of the mass-production of goods. Just as the nineteenth-century conception of political freedom was rendered illusory for large masses of the population by the growth and concentration of economic power, so the nineteenth-century conception of freedom of thought is being fundamentally modified by the development of these new and extremely powerful instruments of power over opinion. The prejudice which the word propaganda still excites in many minds to-day<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn60" id="ch08_fn60">60</a> is closely parallel to the prejudice against state control of industry and trade. Opinion, like trade and industry, should according to the old liberal conception be allowed to flow in its own natural channels without artificial regulation. This conception has broken down on the hard fact that in modern conditions opinion, like trade, is not and cannot be exempt from artificial controls. The issue is no longer whether men shall be politically free to express their opinions, but whether freedom of opinion has, for large masses of people, any meaning but subjection to the influence of innumerable forms of propaganda directed by vested interests of one kind or another. In the totalitarian countries, radio, press and film are state industries absolutely controlled by governments. In democratic countries, conditions vary, but are everywhere tending in the direction of centralized control. Immense corporations are called into existence, which are too powerful and too vital to the community to remain wholly independent of the machine of government, and which themselves find it convenient to accept voluntary collaboration with the state as an alternative to formal control by it. The nationalization of opinion has proceeded everywhere pari passu with the nationalization of industry.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head10">Propaganda as an instrument of policy</p>
<p class="NoIndent">The organized use of power over opinion as a regular instrument of foreign policy is a modern development. Before 1914, cases occurred of the use of propaganda by governments in international relations. The press was freely used by Bismarck and other statesmen, though rather for the purpose of making pronouncements to foreign governments than as a means of influencing public opinion at large. Co-operation between the missionary and the trader, and the support of both by military force, was a familiar nineteenth-century example of unofficial association between propaganda <a id="page_123"/>and economic and military power in the interests of national expansion. But the field of propaganda was limited; and the only people who exploited it at all intensively were the revolutionaries. Any systematic resort to propaganda by governments would have been thought undignified and rather disreputable.</p>
<p class="para">It did not take long for the belligerents of 1914-I8 to realize that ‘psychological war must accompany economic war and military war’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn61" id="ch08_fn61">61</a> It was a condition of success on the military and economic fronts that the ‘morale’ of one’s own side should be maintained, and that of the other side sapped and destroyed. Propaganda was the instrument by which both these ends were pursued. Leaflets were dropped over the enemy lines inciting his troops to mutiny; and this procedure, like most new weapons of war, was at first denounced as being contrary to international law.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn62" id="ch08_fn62">62</a> Moreover, the new conditions of warfare nullified, in this as in so many other respects, the distinction between combatant and civilian; and the morale of the civilian population became for the first time a military objective.</p>
<p class="extract">Long-distance bombing [wrote the British Chief of Staff in January 1918] will produce its maximum moral effect only if visits are constantly repeated at short intervals so as to produce in each area bombed a sustained anxiety. It is this recurrent, as opposed to isolated spasmodic attacks, which interrupts industrial production and undermines public confidence.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn63" id="ch08_fn63">63</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The military chiefs of other belligerent countries were doubtless considering <a id="page_124"/>the same problem in similar terms. The demoralization of the civilian population was the primary objective not only of many air raids but of the German long-range bombardment of Paris by ‘big Bertha’; and the work of the bomb and the shell was reinforced, especially during the last months of the war, by an intense output of printed propaganda. Throughout the first world war the close interdependence between the three forms of power was constantly demonstrated. The success of propaganda on both sides, both at home and in neutral and enemy countries, rose and fell with the varying fortunes of the military and economic struggle. When at length the Allied blockade and Allied victories in the field crippled German resources, Allied propaganda became enormously effective and played a considerable part in the final collapse. The victory of 1918 was achieved by a skilful combination of military power, economic power and power over opinion.</p>
<p class="para">Notwithstanding the general recognition of the importance of propaganda in the later stages of the war, it was still regarded by almost everyone as a weapon specifically appropriate to a period of hostilities. ‘In the same way as I send shells into the enemy trenches, or as I discharge poison gas at him,’ wrote the German general who was primarily responsible for despatching Lenin and his party in the sealed train to Russia, ‘I, as an enemy, have the right to use propaganda against him.’<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn64" id="ch08_fn64">64</a> The abolition of ministries and departments of propaganda at the end of the war was an automatic measure of demobilization. Yet within twenty years of the armistice, in what was still formally a time of peace, many governments were conducting propaganda with an intensity unsurpassed in the war period; and new official or semi-official agencies for the influencing of opinion at home and abroad were springing up in every country. This new development was rendered possible and inevitable by the popularization of international politics and by the growing efficiency of propaganda methods. Since both these processes are likely to continue, its permanence seems assured.</p>
<p class="para">The initiative in introducing propaganda as a regular instrument of international relations must be credited to the Soviet Government. The causes of this were partly accidental. The Bolsheviks, when they seized power in Russia, found themselves desperately weak in the ordinary military and economic weapons of international conflict. The principal element of strength in their position was their influence over opinion in other countries; and it was therefore natural and necessary that they should exploit this weapon to the utmost. In early days, they seriously believed in their ability to dissolve the German armies by the distribution of propaganda leaflets and by fraternization between the lines. Later, they counted on propaganda in Allied countries to paralyse Allied intervention against them in the civil war. Had not propaganda been supplemented by the creation of an effective Red Army, it might by itself have proved ineffective. But the importance of the role it played is sufficiently indicated by the fear of Bolshevik propaganda felt for many years afterwards, and not yet extinct in many European and Asiatic countries. Soviet Russia was the first modern state to establish, in the form of the Communist International, a large-scale permanent international propaganda organization.</p>
<p class="para">There was, however, a profounder cause why control over opinion should have taken a foremost place in the policy of Soviet Russia. Since the end of the Middle Ages, no political organization had claimed to be the repository of universal truth or the missionary of a universal gospel. Soviet Russia was the first national unit to preach an international doctrine and to maintain an effective world-propaganda organization. So revolutionary did this innovation appear that the Communist International purported at the outset to be wholly unconnected with the power of the Soviet Government. But this separation, which may have been effective in details of administration, never extended to major issues of <a id="page_125"/>policy; and after the Soviet state had been consolidated under Stalin, the separation became no more than a polite fiction. This development had far more than a local significance, and gives us the clue to the whole problem of the place of what are now known as ‘ideologies’ in international politics. For if it be true that power over opinion cannot be dissociated from other forms of power, then it appears to follow that, if power cannot be internationalized, there can be no such thing in politics as international opinion, and international propaganda is as much a contradiction in terms as an international army. This view, paradoxical as it may appear, can be supported by extremely cogent arguments; and both it and its implications require careful examination.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head11">National or international propaganda?</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Most political ideas which have strongly influenced mankind have been based on professedly universal principles and have therefore had, at any rate in theory, an international character. The ideas of the French Revolution, free trade, communism in its original form of 1848 or in its reincarnation of 1917, Zionism, the idea of the League of Nations, are all at first sight (as they were in intention) examples of international opinion divorced from power and fostered by international propaganda. But reflexion will set limits on this first impression. How far were any of these ideas politically effective until they took on a national colour and were supported by national power? The answer is not easy. Albert Sorel has a well-known passage on the course taken by the enthusiasm of the French revolutionaries:</p>
<p class="extract">They confuse . . . the propagation of the new doctrines with the extension of French power, the emancipation of mankind with the greatness of the Republic, the rule of reason with that of France, the liberation of peoples with the conquest of states, the European revolution with the domination of the French Revolution over Europe.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn65" id="ch08_fn65">65</a></p>
<p class="NoIndent">The military power of Napoleon was notoriously the most potent factor in the propagation throughout Europe of the ideas of 1789. The political influence of the idea of free trade dated from its adoption by Great Britain as the basis of British policy. The revolutionaries of 1848 failed everywhere to achieve political power; and the ideas of 1848 remained barren. Neither the First nor the Second International attained any real authority. As 1914 showed, there were national labour movements, but there was no international labour movement. The Third or Communist International enjoyed little influence until the power of the Russian state was placed behind it; and Stalin has garbled and disseminated the ideas of 1917 in <a id="page_126"/>much the same way as Napoleon garbled and disseminated the ideas of 1789. Trotskyism, unsupported by the power of any state, remains without influence. Zionism, politically impotent so long as it relied solely on <a id="page_127"/>international propaganda, is effective in so far as it can count on the political backing of Great Powers. Propaganda is ineffective as a political force until it acquires a national home and becomes linked with military and economic power.</p>
<p class="para">The fate of the League of Nations and of propaganda on its behalf is perhaps the best modern illustration of this tendency. As has been shown, men like Woodrow Wilson and Lord Cecil conceived the League of Nations as an expression of ‘the organized opinion of mankind’ controlling the military and economic power of governments. International public opinion was the supreme instrument of power (’by far the strongest weapon we have’); and this opinion was to be created by international propaganda which took no heed of frontiers.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fnst" id="ch08_fnst">*</a> Throughout the nineteen-twenties, this fallacy of the power of international opinion was being gradually exposed. That it survived at all was due to the persistent use by League enthusiasts of slogans like peace and disarmament which were capable of a universal appeal precisely because they meant different, and indeed contradictory, things to different people. Every country wanted to achieve the aims of its policy without war, and therefore stood for peace. Every country wanted disarmament of other countries or disarmament in those weapons which it did not regard as vital to itself. After the collapse of the Disarmament Conference, it became apparent to all that the League of Nations could be effective only in so far as it was an instrument of the national policy of its most powerful members. Opinion in favour of the League ceased altogether to be international, and was confined to those countries where the League was felt to be serving ends of national policy. In Great Britain the League of Nations became for the first time popular with what might be called the nationalist wing of the Conservative Party.</p>
<p class="para">The fallacy of belief in the efficacy of an international public opinion divorced from national power may be further illustrated by developments elsewhere. The group of movements conveniently classified under the rubric of Fascism was based on certain professedly universal principles such as the rejection of democracy and class warfare, the insistence on leadership, and so forth. In its early days, Fascism was authoritatively described as ‘not an article for export’, and was for many years so treated by the countries which adhered to it. At a later date this limitation was explicitly disclaimed,<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn66" id="ch08_fn66">66</a> and Fascism became the theme of a vigorous international propaganda in many parts of the world. It would, however, be a superficial diagnosis to pretend that, while the League of Nations and the Communist International began as instruments of international opinion and ended as instruments of national policy, Fascism began as an instrument of national policy and ended as an instrument of international opinion. In both cases, the international phase was an illusion (which does not mean that many people may not sincerely believe in it). International propaganda for Fascism was an instrument of the national policy of certain states, and grew with the growth of the military and economic power of those states. But the <span class="italic">reductio ad absurdum</span> of international ideological propaganda as a cloak for national policy came with the adoption of negative slogans designed to unite in a political alliance those who shared no positive ideology in common. Thus the Anti-Comintern Pact did not prevent Germany from coming to an agreement with the principal Communist Power when the needs of national policy seemed to require it; and the ‘anti-Fascism’ of the democratic nations did not deter them from seeking the alliance of countries whose forms of government were indistinguishable from Fascism. These slogans had no meaning or substance apart from the national policies of the countries by which they were used. Power over opinion cannot be dissociated from military and economic power.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head12">International agreements regarding propaganda</p>
<p class="NoIndent">Propaganda is now so well recognized as a national political weapon that stipulations regarding its use are fairly common in international agreements. Such stipulations were, appropriately enough, first introduced into agreements made with the Soviet Government for the purpose of limiting the activities of the Communist International. But this could still be thought of as an exceptional case. Outside Soviet Russia, the first recorded agreement to abstain from hostile propaganda seems to have been one concluded between the German and Polish Broadcasting Companies, which undertook to assure that ‘the matter broadcast does not in any way offend the national sentiment of listeners who are nationals of the other contracting party’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn67" id="ch08_fn67">67</a> Propaganda was first raised to the dignity of a universal issue when the Polish Government made proposals to the Disarmament Conference for a convention on ‘moral disarmament’. To limit the propaganda weapon by a general convention proved as hopeless a task as to limit the military weapon.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn68" id="ch08_fn68">68</a> But bilateral agreements for terminating hostile propaganda were concluded between Germany and Poland in 1934 and between Germany and Austria in 1936;<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn69" id="ch08_fn69">69</a> and in the Anglo-Italian Agreement of 16 April 1938, the two countries ‘placed on <a id="page_128"/>record their agreement that any attempt by either of them to employ the methods of publicity and propaganda at its disposal in order to injure the interests of the other would be inconsistent with the good relations which it is the object of the present agreement to establish’.</p>
<p class="para">Such agreements create an obvious difficulty for democracies, which purport not to limit the free expression and publication of opinions about international affairs, and cannot therefore formally undertake to prevent propaganda on their territory against any country; and this embarrassment is reflected in the contorted phraseology of the Anglo-Italian Agreement. The fact is, however, that in the sphere of opinion, as in the economic sphere, the nineteenth-century principles of <span class="italic">laissez-faire</span> no longer hold good, even for democracies. Just as democratic governments have been compelled to control and organize economic life in their territories in order to compete with totalitarian states, so they find themselves at a disadvantage in dealing with these states if they are not in a position to control and organize opinion. Recognition of this fact grew rapidly even in Great Britain. In questions affecting international relations, a discreet influence, amounting in times of crisis to direct though unofficial censorship, was exercised even before the outbreak of the second world war over broadcasting, films and press; and though the use of this influence was frequently criticized in particular cases, it became clear that some such measures of restraint would be applied in similar circumstances by whatever government happened to be in power.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn70" id="ch08_fn70">70</a> Simultaneously, there was a rapid extension of propaganda designed to familiarize foreign opinion with the British point of view. Since 1935, a body called the British Council has exercised the function of ‘making the life and thought of the British peoples more widely known abroad’. In 1938, the British Broadcasting Corporation began the regular broadcasting of news bulletins in various foreign languages. In June 1939, the Prime Minister announced the creation of a new Foreign Publicity Department of the Foreign Office, which served as a nucleus for the Ministry of Information set up immediately on the outbreak of war.</p>
<p class="header2" id="ch08-head13">Truth and morality in propaganda</p>
<p class="NoIndent">We have hitherto discussed power over opinion in precisely the same terms as military and economic power; and the close connexion between these different forms of power is so vital, and has been so much neglected in theoretical discussion, that this seems the most fruitful approach to the problem at the present time. Some people might indeed argue that this is the only correct approach. For in the first place, opinion is conditioned by status and interest; and secondly, as we have seen in a previous chapter, a <a id="page_129"/>ruling class or nation, or dominant group of nations, not only evolves opinions favourable to the maintenance of its privileged position, but can, in virtue of its military and economic superiority, easily impose these opinions on others. The victory of the democratic countries in I9I8 created an almost universal opinion that democracy was the best form of government. In the nineteen-thirties, opinion in many parts of the world on the merits of Fascism as a form of government may be said, without much exaggeration, to have varied <span class="italic">pari passu</span> with the military and economic power of Germany and Italy in relation to the other Great Powers. These propositions could be supported by innumerable examples. If they were absolutely true, then power over opinion would in fact be indistinguishable in character from military and economic power, and there would be nothing which, given sufficient power and technical skill, men could not be made to believe. That this is the case has indeed sometimes been suggested. ‘By clever, persistent propaganda’, said Hitler, ‘even heaven can be represented to a people as hell, and the most wretched life as paradise’;<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn71" id="ch08_fn71">71</a> and American advertising specialists are alleged to hold that ‘only cost limits the delivery of public opinion in any direction on any topic’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn72" id="ch08_fn72">72</a> But these are the pardonable exaggerations of expert practitioners. As we shall see, even Hitler did not really believe in the unlimited power of propaganda to manufacture opinion. Here as elsewhere, the extreme realist position becomes untenable. When we set power over opinion side by side with military and economic power, we have none the less to remember that we are dealing no longer with purely material factors, but with the thoughts and feelings of human beings.</p>
<p class="para">Absolute power over opinion is limited in two ways. In the first place, it is limited by the necessity of some measure of conformity with fact. There are objective facts which are not totally irrelevant to the formation of opinion. Good advertising may persuade the public that a face cream made of inferior materials is the best. But the most expert advertiser could not sell a face cream made of vitriol. Hitler condemned the futility of German propaganda in the first world war which depicted the enemy as ridiculous and contemptible. The propaganda was unsuccessful simply because it was, as the German soldier in the trenches discovered, untrue. This danger that ‘truth will out’, especially in an age of competitive propaganda, is a serious limitation on power over opinion. Education, which is one of the strongest instruments of this power, tends at the same time to promote a spirit of independent enquiry which is also one of the strongest antidotes against it. In so far as it strains and interprets facts for a specific purpose, propaganda always contains within itself this potentially self-defeating element.</p>
<p class="para">Secondly, power over opinion is limited – and perhaps even more effectively – by the inherent utopianism of human nature. Propaganda, <a id="page_130"/>harnessed to military and economic power, always tends to reach a point where it defeats its own end by inciting the mind to revolt against that power. It is a basic fact about human nature that human beings do in the long run reject the doctrine that might makes right. Oppression sometimes has the effect of strengthening the will, and sharpening the intelligence, of its victims, so that it is not universally or absolutely true that a privileged group can control opinion at the expense of the unprivileged. As Hitler himself wrote, ‘every persecution which lacks a spiritual basis’ has to reckon with a ‘feeling of opposition to the attempt to crush an idea by brute force’.<a class="sup" href="#ch08-fn73" id="ch08_fn73">73</a> And this vital fact gives us another clue to the truth that politics cannot be defined solely in terms of power. Power over opinion, which is a necessary part of all power, can never be absolute. International politics are always power politics; for it is impossible to eliminate power from them. But that is only part of the story. The fact that national propaganda everywhere so eagerly cloaks itself in ideologies of a professedly international character proves the existence of an international stock of common ideas, however limited and however weakly held, to which appeal can be made, and of a belief that these common ideas stand somehow in the scale of values above national interests. This stock of common ideas is what we mean by international morality.</p>
<p class="header1" id="ch08-head14">Notes</p>
<table class="footNoteTBL">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fnst" id="ch08-fnst">*</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">See pp. 32–5.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn1" id="ch08-fn1">1.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lenin, <span class="italic">Selected Works</span> (Engl. transl.), vii. p. 295.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn2" id="ch08-fn2">2.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Marx and Engels, <span class="italic">Works</span> (Russian ed.), vii. p. 212.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn3" id="ch08-fn3">3.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Even Lord Baldwin committed himself in I92S to the dangerous half-truth that ‘democracy is government by discussion, by talk’ (<span class="italic">On England</span>, p. 95). In a recent letter to <span class="italic">The Times</span>, Mr Frederic Harrison remarks of the British Commonwealth of Nations that it ‘is not founded on conquest and held together by force of arms. It has been acquired not by the force of our navy and our army but by force of character, and knit together by ties of sympathy, of a common interest, a common language and a common history’ (<span class="italic">The Times</span>, 30 June 1938). This, too, is a dangerous half-truth, which burkes the other and equally important half of the truth, i.e. that the British Commonwealth is held together by the immense military and economic power of Great Britain and would at once dissolve if that power were lost.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn4" id="ch08-fn4">4.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Report to the Sixteenth Congress of the Russian Communist Party reprinted in <span class="italic">L’Union Soviétique et la Cause de la Paix</span>, p. 25; <span class="italic">The Times</span>, 26 June 1939. The italics have been inserted in both cases.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn5" id="ch08-fn5">5.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Intimate Papers of Colonel House</span>, ed. C. Seymour, iv. p. 24.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn6" id="ch08-fn6">6.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Miller, <span class="italic">The Drafting of the Covenant</span>, ii. p. 61. The result of the subsequent enlargements of the Council has already been mentioned (p. 40 note 12).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn7" id="ch08-fn7">7.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Foreign Policy of the Powers</span> (1935: reprinted from <span class="italic">Foreign Affairs</span>), pp. 86–7.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_131"/><a href="#ch08_fn8" id="ch08-fn8">8.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Sixteenth Assembly</span>, Part II. p. 49.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn9" id="ch08-fn9">9.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In 1926, when Palestine was discussed by the Mandates Commission, M. Rappard ‘thought that the Mandatory would incur grave responsibility if it found itself one day faced with the impossibility of preventing a pogrom owing to insufficient troops. Its responsibility, indeed, would be shared by the Mandates Commission, if that Commission had not pointed out this danger’ (<span class="italic">Permanent Mandates Commission, Minutes of Ninth Session</span>, p. 184). The responsibility of the Commission was thus limited to ‘pointing out’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn10" id="ch08-fn10">10.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lugard, <span class="italic">The Dual Mandate in Tropical Africa</span>, p. 53.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn11" id="ch08-fn11">11.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. Russell, <span class="italic">Power</span>, p. 11. I owe to this book, which is an able and stimulating analysis of power as ‘the fundamental concept in social science’, the tripartite classification of power adopted above.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn12" id="ch08-fn12">12.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Lenin, <span class="italic">Collected Works</span> (Engl. transl.), xviii. p. 97; Theses of the Sixth Congress of Comintern quoted in Taracouzio, The Soviet Union and International Law, p. 436.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn13" id="ch08-fn13">13.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 749.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn14" id="ch08-fn14">14.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. G. Hawtrey, <span class="italic">Economic Aspects of Sovereignty</span>, p. 107.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn15" id="ch08-fn15">15.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It is perhaps necessary to recall the part played in British politics in 1914 by the threat of the Conservative Party to support revolutionary action in Ulster.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn16" id="ch08-fn16">16.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. G. Hawtrey, <span class="italic">Economic Aspects of Sovereignty</span>, p. 105.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn17" id="ch08-fn17">17.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations: Official Journal</span>, May 1924, p. 578.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn18" id="ch08-fn18">18.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">R. Niebuhr, <span class="italic">Moral Man and Immoral Society</span>, p. 42.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn19" id="ch08-fn19">19.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Machiavelli, <span class="italic">Discorsi</span>, I. i. ch. v.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn20" id="ch08-fn20">20.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hobbes, <span class="italic">Leviathan</span>, ch. xi.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn21" id="ch08-fn21">21.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">British and Foreign State Papers</span>, ed. Hertslet, xc. p. 811.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn22" id="ch08-fn22">22.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The distinction between the two systems is implicit in Saint-Simon’s prediction that the ‘industrial régime’ will succeed the ‘military régime’, and ‘administration’ replace ‘government’, better known in the form given to it by Engels that the ‘administration of things’ will replace the ‘government of men’ (quotations in Halévy, <span class="italic">Ère des Tyrannies</span>, p. 224).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn23" id="ch08-fn23">23.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Angell, <span class="italic">The Great Illusion</span>, ch. ii.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn24" id="ch08-fn24">24.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. Bosanquet, <span class="italic">Social and International Ideals</span>, pp. 234–5.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn25" id="ch08-fn25">25.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 158.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn26" id="ch08-fn26">26.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Engels, <span class="italic">Anti-Dühring</span> (Engl. transl.), p. I95.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn27" id="ch08-fn27">27.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Planned economy has been developed not only by international frictions, but by social frictions within the state. It can therefore be logically regarded both as a nationalist policy (’economic nationalism’) and as a socialist policy. The second aspect was irrelevant to my present argument, and has therefore been passed over in the text. According to Bruck (<span class="italic">Social and Economic History of Germany</span>, p. 157), the term <span class="italic">Planwirtschaft</span> was invented in Germany during the first world war. But the phrase <span class="italic">der staatliche Wirtschaftsplan</span> occurs in a composite <span class="italic">Grundriss der Sozialӧkonomik</span> (i. 424), published at Tu bingen just before the war, in the general sense of ‘state economic policy’.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn28" id="ch08-fn28">28.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Moeller van den Bruck, <span class="italic">Germany’s Third Empire</span>, p. 50. The idea is a commonplace of National Socialist and Fascist writers.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_132"/><a href="#ch08_fn29" id="ch08-fn29">29.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In Germany, ‘political economy’ was at first translated <span class="italic">Nationalӧkonomie</span>, which was tentatively replaced in the present century by <span class="italic">Sozialӧkonomie</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn30" id="ch08-fn30">30.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘Economic conflicts and divergence of economic interest are perhaps the most serious and most permanent of all the dangers which are likely to threaten the peace of the world’ (<span class="italic">League of Nations</span>: C.E.I. 44, p. 7).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn31" id="ch08-fn31">31.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘I have deliberately debarred myself from touching on the strictly political aspects. . . . It is, however, impossible to ignore the fact that we are working in their shadow’ (<span class="italic">Report . . . on the Possibility of Obtaining a General Reduction of the Obstacles to International Trade</span>, Cmd 5648).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn32" id="ch08-fn32">32.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">All these passages are quoted from the Report of the Palestine Royal Commission of 1937, Cmd 5479, pp. 298–300.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn33" id="ch08-fn33">33.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">This interpretation is confirmed by the report of the Phillimore Committee, on whose proposals the text of Article I6 was based. The Committee ‘considered financial and economic sanctions as being simply the contribution to the work of preventing aggression which might properly be made by countries which were not in a position to furnish actual military aid’ (<span class="italic">International Sanctions: Report by a Group of Members of the Royal Institute of International Affairs</span>, p. 115, where the relevant texts are examined).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn34" id="ch08-fn34">34.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 18 May 1934; <span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. 2139.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn35" id="ch08-fn35">35.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It is not, of course, suggested that the military weapon must always be used. The British Grand Fleet was little used in the first world war. But it would be rash to assume that the result would have been much the same if the British Government had not been prepared to use it. What paralysed sanctions in 1935–36 was the common knowledge that the League Powers were not prepared to use the military weapon.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn36" id="ch08-fn36">36.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It is worth noting that Stresemann was fully alive to this point when Germany entered the League of Nations. When the Secretary-General argued that Germany, if she contracted out of military sanctions, could still participate in economic sanctions, Stresemann replied: ‘We cannot do that either; if we take part in an economic boycott of a powerful neighbour, a declaration of war against Germany might be the consequence, since the exclusion of another country from intercourse with a nation of sixty million citizens would be a hostile act’ (<span class="italic">Stresemann’s Diaries and Papers</span> (Engl. transl.), ii. p. 69).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn37" id="ch08-fn37">37.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">F. L. Schuman, <span class="italic">International Politics</span>, p. 356.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn38" id="ch08-fn38">38.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Zimmern, <span class="italic">Quo Vadimus?,</span> p. 41.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn39" id="ch08-fn39">39.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Works of Alexander Hamilton</span>, iv. pp. 69 sqq.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn40" id="ch08-fn40">40.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">List, <span class="italic">The National System of Political Economy</span> (Engl. transl.), p. 425.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn41" id="ch08-fn41">41.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">Supply of Food and Raw Materials in Time of War</span>, Cmd 2644.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn42" id="ch08-fn42">42.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The resolutions are printed in <span class="italic">History of the Peace Conference</span>, ed. Temperley, v. pp. 368–9.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn43" id="ch08-fn43">43.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">W. Y. Elliott in <span class="italic">Political Quarterly</span>, April–June 1938, p. 181.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn44" id="ch08-fn44">44.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">G. D. H. Cole in <span class="italic">Political Quarterly</span>, January–March 1939, p. 65.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn45" id="ch08-fn45">45.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">W. F. Bruck, <span class="italic">Social and Economic History of Germany</span>, p. 80.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn46" id="ch08-fn46">46.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">The whole subject is thoroughly investigated, and innumerable examples are cited, in Eugene Staley, <span class="italic">War and the Private Investor</span>. Mr Staley’s main conclusion is that official policy has rarely been influenced in an important degree by private investment, but that private investment has again and again been officially directed and encouraged as an instrument of policy.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_133"/><a href="#ch08_fn47" id="ch08-fn47">47.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Marx, <span class="italic">Gesammelte Schriften</span>, i. p. 84.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn48" id="ch08-fn48">48.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Annual Presidential Message to Congress, 3 December 1912.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn49" id="ch08-fn49">49.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Times</span>, 29 December I938.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn50" id="ch08-fn50">50.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Examples from France and Austria are quoted by C. K. Hobson, <span class="italic">The Export of Capital</span> (1914), p. I6. Russia and Belgium were also lending countries which commonly imposed this condition.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn51" id="ch08-fn51">51.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">It may be significant that in 1938 an official of the Foreign Office was transferred to the staff of the Export Credits Guarantee Department.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn52" id="ch08-fn52">52.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 15 Dece5ber 1938: <span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. 2319.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn53" id="ch08-fn53">53.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">House of Commons, 1 November I938, reprinted in N. Chamberlain, <span class="italic">The Struggle for Peace</span>, p. 340.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn54" id="ch08-fn54">54.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">B. de Siebert, <span class="italic">Entente Diplomacy of the World War</span>, p. 20.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn55" id="ch08-fn55">55.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">G. F. Hudson, <span class="italic">The Far East in World Politics</span>, p. 54.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn56" id="ch08-fn56">56.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">British Documents on the Origins of the War</span>, ed. Gooch and Temperley, iii. p. 403.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn57" id="ch08-fn57">57.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The Philosophical Works of David Hume</span>, iv. p. 31.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn58" id="ch08-fn58">58.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 196.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn59" id="ch08-fn59">59.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">G. G. Coulton, <span class="italic">Mediaeval Panorama</span>, p. 458 <span class="italic">et al</span>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn60" id="ch08-fn60">60.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">‘I wish’, said the Home Secretary in the House of Commons on 28 July I939, ‘there had been no necessity for any Government publicity anywhere in the world. I still look forward to living long enough to see an end of this objectionable relic of the years of the war’ (<span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. I834).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn61" id="ch08-fn61">61.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">H. D. Lasswell in the Foreword to G. G. Bruntz, <span class="italic">Allied Propaganda and the Collapse of the German Empire</span>. This book is the most comprehensive available account of its subject.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn62" id="ch08-fn62">62.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In 1917, two British airmen captured by the Germans were sentenced to ten years’ hard labour for dropping such leaflets in contravention of the laws of war. The sentences were remitted on a British threat of reprisals. The practice was explicitly sanctioned in The Hague rules of 1923 for the conduct of aerial warfare (Bruntz, op. cit., pp. 142–4).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn63" id="ch08-fn63">63.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">The War in the Air</span> (British Official History of the War), by H. A. Jones vi. Appendix VI, p. 26.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn64" id="ch08-fn64">64.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hoffmann, <span class="italic">War Diaries</span> (Engl. transl.), ii. p. 176.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn65" id="ch08-fn65">65.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">A Sorel, <span class="italic">L’Europe et la Révolution Française</span>, pp. 541–2.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn66" id="ch08-fn66">66.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Mussolini, <span class="italic">Scritti e Discorsi</span>, vi. 151; vii. 230.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn67" id="ch08-fn67">67.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote"><span class="italic">League of Nations</span>, C. 602, M. 240, 1931, ix, p. 4.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn68" id="ch08-fn68">68.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">An international convention under which the parties undertook to prevent the broadcasting from their territories of ‘incitements to war’, or in general hostile propaganda, against other contracting parties, was signed at Geneva by most of the surviving members of the League in September 1936 (<span class="italic">League of Nations</span>, C. 399 (I), M. 252 (I), 1936, xii).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn69" id="ch08-fn69">69.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">In both cases the agreement about propaganda did not figure in an officially published text, but its existence was disclosed in communiqués. The communiqué of the Austrian Foreign Office on the <span class="italic">German-Austrian</span> Agreement of 11 July I936, announced that ‘both countries are to refrain from all aggressive uses of the wireless, films, news services and the theatré (<span class="italic">Documents on International Affairs</span>, 1936, p. 324).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a id="page_134"/><a href="#ch08_fn70" id="ch08-fn70">70.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">A revealing debate on the press, initiated by the Liberal Opposition, took place in the House of Commons on 7 December 1938. While Liberal speakers argued for the freedom of the press on familiar nineteenth-century lines, the spokesman of the Labour Opposition declared that the freedom of the press was already illusory, and wanted to ‘make every newspaper in the country responsible for every item of news it prints and answerable to this House or some public authority’ (<span class="italic">Official Report</span>, col. 1293).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn71" id="ch08-fn71">71.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 302.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn72" id="ch08-fn72">72.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">J. Truslow Adams, <span class="italic">The Epic of America</span>, p. 360.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="footNote1"><a href="#ch08_fn73" id="ch08-fn73">73.</a></p></td>
<td>  </td>
<td><p class="footNote">Hitler, <span class="italic">Mein Kampf</span>, p. 187.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
</body>
</html>