<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Emergence Of The Nieo Ideology</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <h1 id="ht0017" class="h1_title"><a id="page_58"></a><a id="page_59"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0017">2
    <br class="calibre1"/>
    The "New" Ideology in the 1960s</a></h1>

    <div class="quotes">
      <div class="text_noindent">
        [UNCTAD] will show whether the developed countries are capable of discharging the obligations imposed on them
        by their wealth. It will also require them to renounce their traditional policy of passively accepting the
        supremacy of market forces. Against blind respect for those forces and against the trade restrictions imposed
        by the strongest against the weakest ranges the new ideology which inspired the convening of the conference.
        That ideology . . . will constitute a new phase in the age old struggle for the liberation of peoples and
        respect for human dignity.
      </div>

      <div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Alphonso Patino of Colombia, 1963
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="quotes">
      <div class="text_noindent">
        . . . the developing nations want change. They want a "new" international division of labor. They
        want and have a "new" trade forum. They want "new" trade principles. They want new and
        different techniques of aid, not necessarily at the sacrifice of the old but in addition to what is now being
        done.
      </div>

      <div class="attrib-text_right">
        — Sidney Weintraub of the United States, 1964(<a id="bck_fn0101" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0101">1</a>)
      </div>
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Even though the decade began with signs that the Bretton Woods system could be reformed in favor of third world
      interests, the sixties were marked by growing economic divisions between north and south. LDCs became more aware
      of how their interests clashed with those of the DMCs. From 1960 through 1965 evidence mounted that poorer
      nations received few of the benefits the liberal system had promised. Developed countries enjoyed most of the
      growth induced by trade. Trade favoritism among already industrialized states continued. Third world leaders saw
      such continuing abuses as proof that the postwar system merely continued prewar relations in a new <a id="page_60"></a>form. The LDCs, united under the ethic and analysis developed since the war, pushed for creation of
      a new international economic system dedicated to that new ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the first five years of the decade the ideology itself developed only along the lines already established in
      the 1950s. Third world economic analysis became more complex in response to new issues. Prebisch's framework
      allowed the south to apprehend and explain growing income and trade "gaps" between rich and poor
      nations. Third world governments proposed an array of new policies to increase their share of global trade. They
      suggested specific public aid targets, multicommodity pricing agreements, compensatory financing for trade income
      shortfalls, and special aid for the least developed LDCs (LLDCs), especially the new states in Africa. All of
      these new economic proposals attacked similar problems, consequences of the Bretton Woods system that no one who
      created the system had expected, or that none had expected would have such distressing effects on poorer nations.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      By mid-decade the ideology had begun to change in fundamentally new ways. Adherents had developed a new
      self-awareness and self-confidence. They stopped calling for reforms and started calling for a new economic
      order. They had become aware of the ideology they shared and aware that the ideology outlined a plan for a new
      economic system. They knew that plan was not complete; for example, the ellipsis in Patino's comment stands
      in place of a long remark that the ideology had to be specified further. In the sixties, for the first time,
      third world officials began to pursue the development of their ideology consciously.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the middle of the decade the ideology's adherents developed a specific political identity as the Group of
      77. The agreement on a formal political identity triggered the alliance's development of its first political
      theory, explicit views about strategy and tactics which had not been part of the third world's shared
      position before. The southern allies insisted on using what they called "democratic means" to achieve
      their ends. They understood such means to include majority or consensual rule by national governments voting as
      equals, as well as the use of persuasion to influence legislative and public opinion in the wealthy states.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Later, third world leaders would learn from the failure of this initial strategy. As a result of their failures
      in the sixties, they would know how to exploit the DMCs' economic vulnerabilities in the early 1970s when the
      Bretton Woods system began to create problems even its key members felt.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the 1960s, however, not only had the LDCs not yet agreed upon the political strategies needed to exploit
      <a id="page_61"></a>the vulnerabilities that would appear when the Bretton Woods system started to break down;
      there were few hints that such a breakdown would ever occur. The system was in its heyday. It was brilliantly
      achieving the goals its founders had set for it. The cover of the GATT<sup class="item2">'</sup>s 1966 annual
      report makes the point well with its graphs of indices of international trade and world production from 1956 to
      1966.(<a id="bck_fn0102" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0102">2</a>) Both rise dramatically, trade volumes leading
      the way for production. The liberal system assured the truly unprecedented global prosperity that marked the
      sixties. For the wealthy market states, unlike for the poorer ones, few unanticipated problems appeared in the
      sixties to make them doubt the viability and value of the system which had spurred the unprecedented growth.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      One unanticipated development in the sixties, indirectly connected to the system's success, created as many
      opportunities for the third world alliance as it did problems. But the new order ideology, as it existed then,
      did not give the alliance the theoretical means of fully resolving the problems while fully exploiting the
      opportunities. The vast increase of new sovereign states provided the alliance with many more members and thus
      increased the political importance of the emerging ideology. But the interests and frustrations of the new states
      differed from those of states that had been independent longer. Some of the new states said that rich nations had
      duties to poor nations because colonizers had historical duties to the colonized. This ethic based on historical
      obligations clashed with earlier third world notions about the permanent rights and duties of states. This
      difference of opinion contributed to the failure of the Group of 77's first political strategy by reducing
      the impact of attempts to present a united front in order to influence opinion in developed countries. This
      disunity, however, left a fortuitous legacy for the south: The unity of the third world behind the New
      International Economic Order in the early seventies caught many in the north by surprise.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The part of the story of the new order ideology told in this chapter ends before the third world reaffirmed its
      unity. It begins with the trade issues the founders of Bretton Woods failed to anticipate and shows how those
      emergent issues led to the first UNCTAD, the formation of the Group of 77, and the first southern calls for a
      completely "new" economic system. The second section discusses the political analysis the group adopted
      in the latter half of the decade. The third and final section relates how other unanticipated consequences of the
      system, first apparent in the sixties, led to the developments in third world economic policy analysis at the end
      of the decade. It also discusses the differences in third world opinion that then were current, linking them both
      to the different problems experienced by different third world states as a result of the system's <a id="page_62"></a>operation and to the incomplete incorporation of the newest states into the alliance.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0018" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0018">From Trade Issues to the Group of
    77</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      As would be expected of the international organization most concerned with trade matters, the GATT was the first
      institution to make the international community aware of trade related global income "gaps." It did so
      in 1960 by suggesting explanations for problems others had previously identified but not explained. In 1958 Nehru
      had used postwar national income statistics to demonstrate a widening income gap between rich and poor
      nations.(<a id="bck_fn0103" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0103">3</a>) By 1959 it had become commonplace for some
      news magazines in worldwide circulation to identify the north-south division of the globe as more critical than
      the east-west division. (<a id="bck_fn0104" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0104">4</a>) Nonetheless, in the late
      fifties, when aid rather than trade issues still dominated the north-south agenda, officials and commentators
      rarely correlated the increasingly apparent income gap with recent developments in international trade. Of
      course, throughout the fifties third world leaders recognized that higher returns from trade could increase their
      national wealth; that is why they proposed some new trade policies, then compensatory financing for trade
      shortfalls, and finally even resurrection of the entire ITO.(<a id="bck_fn0105" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0105">5</a>) But actual figures on the third world's declining proportion of both world trade
      and world income first became available in 1960 through a report circulated by the GATT.(<a id="bck_fn0106" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0106">6</a>) The highly correlated figures suggested that the third world's
      declining proportion of world trade caused its declining proportion of world income.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      GATT did not draw the causal connection from the related trends. But third world leaders increasingly did draw
      that connection by following, in part, the Prebisch thesis. Most southern leaders first gave the implications of
      the Prebisch argument serious consideration only when the trade-related income gaps became apparent. Third world
      representatives to the U.N. carefully discussed different ways that nonmarket forces might be keeping the prices
      of DMC manufactured goods relatively high. Some called for establishing countervailing influences on the world
      market in order to keep LDC prices high as well. The poorer oil producing states formed OPEC and justified it to
      the United Nations General Assembly as an institution designed to keep oil prices high. (<a id="bck_fn0107" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0107">7</a>) (Ironically, they did not succeed in their stated purpose until 1973.)
      In 1960 the Colombian delegate spoke to the General Assembly's economic committee about establishing
      "trade unions" of raw material producers.(<a id="bck_fn0108" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0108">8</a>)
      As if to capitalize on these developments, in 1961 ECLA republished Prebisch's seminal study.(<a id="bck_fn0109" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0109">9</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      <a id="page_63"></a>Just as in the 1950s when some third world officials used parts of Prebisch's theory to
      understand and respond to trade problems created by cold war stockpiling policies, once again few third world
      officials completely adopted Prebisch's explanation of the trade and income gaps. Instead of focusing
      directly on the powers of the firms and unions in developed nations, most representatives of individual third
      world governments talked about the flaws in the postwar trade system that the Haberler report to the GATT
      outlined. Third world officials saw the relative decline in their income from trade as a reflection of the fact
      that wealthy market states had been able to mold the liberal system to their needs. The trade system, they noted,
      tended to allow DMCs to trade industrial products among themselves freely while forcing LDCs to pay tariffs on
      the same items. And the system allowed the north to erect protectionist barriers to southern imports.(<a id="bck_fn0110" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0110">10</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Only when the poorer nations turned to solutions to the apparent trade problems did they line up behind the
      Prebisch thesis rather than Haberler's. The LDCs never called for a return to the GATT' s laissez faire
      principles; instead, the south continued to call for conscious adoption of global trade policies that would
      increase third world income, policies justified by their view of the rights and duties of states. As a Uruguayan
      official put it in 1960, in place of the GATT's "equal treatment" principle, which allowed richer
      nations greater power to influence economic relations than poorer nations (even before special concessions like
      those to the European Community had been made), there should be a principle of "equitable treatment,"
      international policies aimed at fostering the trade relations appropriate to each nation's level of economic
      development and its development goals.(<a id="bck_fn0111" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0111">11</a>) In
      particular, beginning in 1961 and following a set of proposals made by Africa's newly independent, most
      populous state, Nigeria, the third world demanded a system of generalized tariff preferences for third world
      goods.(<a id="bck_fn0112" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0112">12</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      This new policy proposal did not fundamentally change the emerging third world economic ideology. Adherents
      simply added the new version of the trade issue and new proposed solution to other policy analyses already in the
      ideology. At the first conference of nonaligned countries in Belgrade in September of 1961 not only did the
      delegates condemn the postwar aid system for the way it linked cold war goals to development goals, they
      condemned the trade system as well. Delegates called on the developed nations to improve the terms of trade for
      LDC goods and to end restrictive trade practices that harmed poorer states.(<a id="bck_fn0113" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0113">13</a>) At the same time, southern spokesmen in the U.N. reaffirmed their ethic and their
      central economic goal as keys to abolishing the trade and income gaps. As the Bolivian delegate put it,
      "Each <a id="page_64"></a>society has its own needs and its own means to satisfy them. But if the
      underdeveloped countries wish to survive they must industrialize."(<a id="bck_fn0114" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0114">14</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      By 1961 even the GATT was calling for the industrialization of the third world as one means for dealing with the
      poorer nations' declining share of world trade. In a special study of trade and development for its
      <span class="underline">Annual Report</span>, the GATT Secretariat analyzed possible ways to ease the relative
      decline. It found little room for expanding traditional exports and advocated industrialization along the model
      of the Latin American Free Trade Area instead. That model required that national specialization in particular
      industrial lines become an object of intergovernmental cooperation in each of the developing regions. The GATT
      even raised the possibility that intervention to raise the terms of trade for traditional exports might prove
      worthwhile in the short run, although it did not discuss specific ways to accomplish such intervention.(<a id="bck_fn0115" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0115">15</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Continuing GATT interest in the declining relative volume of third world trade reflected the fact that liberal
      economists treated the problem as a real dilemma. Most felt that in the long run terms of trade would swing in
      favor of food and raw materials (rather than manufactured goods) under the influence of diminishing returns.
      Because raw materials exist only in limited quantities, they should become scarcer, costlier to extract, and,
      thus, relatively more costly as time goes on.(<a id="bck_fn0116" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0116">16</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Liberal economists may still be right, <span class="bold">in</span> the long run. But in the 1960s, predictions
      based on facile analysis of the long run availability of raw materials proved wrong. Instead of rising, the value
      of third world raw material exports relative to northern manufactures fell. That fact could be explained (without
      rejecting the liberals' long run conclusions) by pointing to the different manipulations of the world market
      by unequally powerful states. The already rich benefited the most from such manipulations. At least that was the
      conclusion both the GATT and a significantly large group of third world officials accepted. What to do about it
      was another matter.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Just as the LDCs remained committed to their vision, the GATT Secretariat remained committed to liberal trade.
      The GATT's commitment precluded it from serving as a framework for the sorts of policies third world
      governments preferred to use to combat the trade and income gaps. In the early sixties they began to look for
      other organizational frameworks.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In 1962 the Cairo Second Afro-Asian Conference called for a United Nations trade conference to provide an
      international forum outside GATT for proposals like commodity pricing agreements, compensatory financing, and a
      generalized system of tariff preferences. The U.N. <a id="page_65"></a>votes of the governments represented at
      the Afro-Asian conference, along with the votes of those Latin American states which had been invited observers
      and of socialist governments who wanted the U.K. conference to deal with ways to expand east-west trade, assured
      that the first United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD I) would be called quickly. The General
      Assembly scheduled the conference for late spring of 1964.(<a id="bck_fn0117" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0117">17</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the months between the Cairo conference and UNCTAD third world frustrations over the effects of the postwar
      economic system coalesced. In addition to the problems of cold war-related aid policies and the GATT's
      obviously inadvertent function as an agency sanctioning DMC protectionist policies, other issues had been
      festering.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the third world view, despite the creation of the IDA and the Special Fund, the World Bank and bilateral aid
      donors had consistently exacerbated the gap between rich and poor states by loaning only to the richest of the
      poor.(<a id="bck_fn0118" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0118">18</a>) The IDA itself remained only a poor
      second-best alternative to SUNFED because the IDA adopted the World Bank's system of voting weighted in
      proportion to wealth, rather than the one nation, one vote system SUNFED would have followed. Dissatisfaction
      with the aid system even convinced the majority in General Assembly to set official targets for aid to third
      world countries, to define one of the duties of the wealthy states throughout the development decade more
      explicitly as the duty to give 1 percent of their GNPs to poorer states, a goal few wealthy states ever reached.
      The UNRRA goal for grants to needy nations, which some poorer states could say that they themselves had
      respected, provide the precedent for the 1 percent figure. Those unusual LDCs that had received significant aid
      since the second world war, such as India, complained about the burden that repaying those debts placed on an
      economy still trying to catch up with the wealthy states, the problem the IDA was supposed to solve.(<a id="bck_fn0119" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0119">19</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Even the Bretton Woods monetary system came under third world attack in the months leading up to UNCTAD I.
      According to the south, the wealthy countries controlling the monetary system were the only nations that could
      afford to make their currencies convertible. The major evidence LDCs offered for that assertion was the fact that
      it took nearly a decade and a half of internationally supported postwar economic development before western
      European states wanted to make their money convertible. For those states that could afford them, convertible
      currencies made it easier trade, at least with other countries that had convertible currencies. The fact that
      LDCs could not yet afford convertibility meant that developed countries would be more likely to increase their
      trade with each other than they would be to increase their trade with LDCs. Given the LDCs' views <a id="page_66"></a>about the rights and duties of states, they placed the blame for this situation on the postwar
      monetary system, which had enshrined the principle of convertibility, and not on themselves. The European
      precedent suggested, after all, that poorer nations should not be expected to live up to the monetary rules the
      postwar system demanded.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Despite this criticism, the postwar monetary system was the object of much less third world scorn in the early
      sixties than either the trade or aid systems. Third world spokesmen even praised the IMF in 1963 for establishing
      a system of short term loans that could be taken out by countries suffering losses in expected income due to
      sudden drops in the prices of commodities they exported. Still, the LDCs chastised the IMF for limiting this
      financing to an amount that would bring export earning up to a longer term trend, a trend that third world
      governments believed was declining for almost any commodity they exported.(<a id="bck_fn0120" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0120">20</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In light of these mounting grievances, when the Egyptian delegate began the General Assembly debate on economic
      matters directly after the Second Afro-Asian Conference had ended in Cairo, he summarized a history of
      frustrations going back to the Marshall Plan and UNRRA. He said that significant international systems for aid to
      DMCs, systems which took into account those countries' own definitions of their economic needs, had existed
      for years. Those systems, developed to aid postwar Europe, had never been copied in giving aid to Asian, African,
      and Latin American countries. Most significantly, similar consideration of third world nations' self-defined
      economic needs never took place.(<a id="bck_fn0121" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0121">21</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      By June of 1963 the nations that would become the Group of 77 had formally outlined their UNCTAD positions
      through a series of regional meetings. At those regional conferences third world leaders turned their
      frustrations with the postwar economic system into a call for "a new international division of labor,"
      a division that would no longer make the third world the world's "hewers of wood and drawers of
      water," the south said, using a Biblical phrase that already had long history in the literature on
      imperialism before 1963.(<a id="bck_fn0122" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0122">22</a>) The "new international
      division of labor" simply meant that the third world should become industrialized.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In 1964 this call for a whole new international economic system was no doubt more symbolic than practical. Even
      if they had had the power to create a new economic order, third world governments still did not have the plan.
      The regional third world meetings came up with outlines of a new global system of production no more coherent or
      complete than any of the others the third world had presented since the war. The regional meetings simply
      reiterated the reform proposals that third world states had long supported. The call for a <a id="page_67"></a>"new" world economy was more a way of symbolizing the increasing significance that third
      world governments attached to their proposals in the months before UNCTAD.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Plans offered in the months before UNCTAD even differed a bit from region to region throughout the third world.
      The Latin American states emphasized that those nations that had benefited the most from the postwar economic
      institutions had the greatest duty to aid other nations. Latin America also placed solutions to debt servicing
      problems in one of the most prominant positions in its plan.(<a id="bck_fn0123" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0123">23</a>) African states identified former colonies as the most needy states and gave special
      emphasis to calls for tariff preferences to be given to the least advantaged nations. While the Latin American
      resolution mentioned that proposal it placed it lower on the agenda simple because a smaller proportion of the
      Latin American states could be called "least advantaged" by any definition. The Africans also called
      for multi-commodity pricing agreements that would allow funds collected while protecting the ceiling price of one
      commodity (by selling from a buffer stock) to be used to defend the floor price of another commodity.(<a id="bck_fn0124" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0124">24</a>) This was another policy discovered among the many
      never-enacted suggestions left by Lord Keynes. (<a id="bck_fn0125" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0125">25</a>)
      Latin American and Asian delegates failed to consider it until the Africans brought it up at the joint meeting of
      the regions prior to UNCTAD.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Asians, Africans, and Latin Americans easily reconciled the differences in their draft proposals by invoicing the
      principles they had developed in the forties. Both the debt problem, of special interest to the richest LDCs in
      Latin America and Asia, and the problems associated with stabilizing and increasing the prices of the weakest
      commodities traded, issues especially important to Africa, had to be included as issues to be addressed by the
      "new" world economic order. Each problem reflected a major impediment in the development paths
      particular sovereign states had chosen.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world unity behind shared principles increased in the months leading up to the first UNCTAD. Third world
      governments repeatedly emphasized the duty of each state to support the economic development programs chosen by
      other states. Third world spokesmen even asserted that this principle explained part of the value of their new
      ideology. They called the ideology a contribution to global economic development. Echoing Patino, who had made
      the statement at the head of this chapter the week before, a Libyan delegate explained to the General
      Assembly's economic committee in 1963 that third world states had discharged their development duties toward
      others by contributing a new, higher set of moral values to the development debate.(<a id="bck_fn0126" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0126">26</a>) Along with Patino, the Libyan represented the general opinion of southern
      officials when he stated that the new ideology was an <a id="page_68"></a>historically unique, valuable
      contribution to humanity.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the first UNCTAD southern governments acted on the basis of their self-perceived moral leadership to have the
      conference approve their ethic and their analysis of the world economy. Before the meeting Raul Prebisch, who had
      been elevated from ECLA to be Secretary General of the UNCTAD in 1963, provided a new, more extensive gloss of
      his theories and a set of policy recommendations in a report entitled "Toward a New Trade Policy for
      Development." This report became the informal agenda for the conference.(<a id="bck_fn0127" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0127">27</a>) The conference approved resolutions both restating the report's policy proposals
      and affirming bits of Prebisch's analysis. The resolutions called these proposals and assertions "trade
      principles" that would guide the "new and just world economic order" the conference intended to
      create. (<a id="bck_fn0128" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0128">28</a>) All these principles had appeared earlier,
      outgrowths of the Havana Charter debates, the <span class="underline">Panch Shila</span>, assertions about the
      validity of Prebisch's analysis of trade, and the special demands that each third world region made directly
      before UNCTAD I.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Many governments rejected the third world's self-proclaimed moral leadership and the principles embodying it,
      but even at the first UNCTAD northern opponents to the south's call for a new order were divided. With fewer
      than three other partners, the United States voted against five of the third world's fifteen
      "general" principles. Those principles all affirmed parts of the third world view of the economic
      rights and duties of states -- the principle of the equality of states, the principles stating that trade and
      development were global concerns, and ones saying that every state had the right to choose its own economic
      system and control the natural resources within its boundaries. The U.S. was a minority of one opposing a
      principle that disarmament should be undertaken to free funds for development. Between four and nine other DMCs
      joined the U.S. when it opposed approving international commodity agreements, "equitable treatment,"
      and development goals for the IMF. Britain and Australia alone opposed a principle that colonized nations should
      be given special development consideration.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      No one opposed five other principles. Two referred to other special targets for development, the LLDCs and
      landlocked areas. Two more referred directly to the issues that triggered the calls for UNCTAD in the first
      place. DMCs agreed that their own moves toward economic integration, including the European Community, should not
      harm LDCs, and all states agreed that similar regional trade groups among LDCs should be allowed. The final
      principle approved without dissent was the abstract goal of the conference, movement toward a new international
      division of labor.(<a id="bck_fn0129" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0129">29</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      These votes determined how the Group of 77 would <a id="page_69"></a>interpret the results of the conference.
      While many DMCs opposed the group's practical suggestions for increasing third world income from trade, the
      U.S. could be singled out as the major opponent to the even more fundamental third world principles. That meant
      there was little hope for the immediate future, in spite of all the bright talk about the "development
      decade" that had marked the end of the fifties. Immediately after UNCTAD I most third world spokesmen
      identified the U.S. as the primary author of the postwar system, the system's major beneficiary, and the
      major reason that fundamental reform of the system was impossible.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Such an assessment may have been too harsh. American opposition to some of the south's principles may only
      have reflected misunderstanding of the south's views. Sidney Weintraub, one of the American delegates, wrote
      after the conference that its "Final Act" (the document containing the fifteen principles) did not
      necessarily reflect what was in the minds of all those at the conference. That is certainly true. But the
      "Final Act" did reflect the ideology that Asian, African, and Latin American representatives to global
      economic meetings had been developing for twenty years; earlier third world positions provide a good guide to
      what was in the minds of southern delegates at UNCTAD; The history of the new order ideology suggests a slightly
      different understanding of "real" third world concerns than the one Weintraub offered.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Weintraub considered the third world proposals basically self-serving. He felt that the principles opposed by the
      U.S. were designed to let LDCs unfairly claim some of the current wealth some developed states had earned. To him
      the Group of 77<sup class="item2">'</sup>s position appeared doubly unfair because it seemed to demand much
      less from the socialist states than from the DMCs.(<a id="bck_fn0130" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0130">30</a>)
      Both judgements can be questioned even though they logically follow from American premises at the time.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      One American premise was that the rules of international economic conduct had been long established and accepted
      by all nations. Yet in 1964 the the Bretton Woods system had only been operating as it had been intended to for
      five years and its rules had never been accepted by the majority of states at UNCTAD. The south still acted in
      1964 the way the U.S. had in 1944, as if the best structure for international economic relations had yet to be
      discovered and agreed upon.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      A second U.S. premise was that the LDCs goal of a "new" order was just a new way to express an
      old-fashioned state interest in aggrandizment at the expense of others. Yet the more complex third world goal
      remained as it had been in the 1940s; southern states wanted to establish an international economic system based
      on permanent national development rights and responsibilities. By 1964 the relative poverty of the <a id="page_70"></a>third world convinced its leaders that, under their own principles, they were no longer required to
      materially aid other states. Their responsibilities were limited to things like promulgating their
      twenty-year-old "new" moral values within the U.N., values that (while self-serving in the short term)
      were considered a real contribution by many in the south. (<a id="bck_fn0131" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0131">31</a>) Southern aid and trade proposals in 1964 no more envisioned reducing the wealth of
      the DMCs than the U.S. UNRRA proposals in 1944 envisioned reducing the wealth of Latin American contributors.
      Rather, both sets of proposals aimed at assuring that a specific region of the globe would be able to produce a
      greater proportion of the new wealth constantly created by the world economy. The UNCTAD proposals especially
      aimed at giving the third world more of the globe's trade-induced growth, something the LDCs seemed to have
      lost to the DMCs since the war.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In contrast, given American premises, the UNCTAD proposals had to be seen as nothing other than a challenge to
      the only legitimate order in the world economy. They had to be understood as part of the LDCs<sup class="item2">'</sup> strategy in a worldwide zero sum game in which their economic gain was the DMCs<sup class="item2">'</sup> economic loss and in which the DMCs' economic loss was the political gain of their
      greatest rival, the communist bloc.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Given the nature of the south's grievances, which predated the cold war, the American tendency to understand
      the results of UNCTAD in east-west terms disturbed most southern delegates. Nonetheless, at the first UNCTAD the
      second and third worlds were clearly allies. The socialist governments' goal at the meeting was to, "air
      their grievances against import-export restrictions and discriminatory cold war policies imposed upon them by the
      developed countries."(<a id="bck_fn0132" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0132">32</a>) Throughout the conference
      socialist states seemed to accommodate third world demands that they expand their trade with the south, thus
      making it appear that the east-south agreement could extend further than the conference floor.(<a id="bck_fn0133" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0133">33</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The depth of the increasing ideological rift between first and third worlds can be seen by comparing
      Weintraub's image of the new system that third world governments wanted to create to the image of the postwar
      system held by the most radical third world governments. The extreme northern (e.g., U.S.) and southern views had
      come to resemble the "mirror images" that the superpowers had of each others' aims. Like cold war
      mirror images, the views of the extreme states in the north and south assured ongoing misunderstanding.(<a id="bck_fn0134" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0134">34</a>) The most radical third world states viewed the postwar
      system as a deliberately engineered mechanism for exploiting poorer nations' property, just as the U.S. saw
      the proposed system as a deliberately engineered mechanism for <a id="page_71"></a>exploiting developed
      nations' property. Both extremes even understood the role of the socialist states in the same way. While
      Weintraub viewed the Group of 77 as unfairly excusing the socialist states from the group's wealth-grabbing
      scheme, some third world leaders viewed DMC moves in the sixties toward expanding east-west trade as ways of
      integrating the socialist countries into the unfair expanding trade system as equal partners and thus leaving the
      third world, the only exploited region, with an even smaller proportion of the world's trade.(<a id="bck_fn0135" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0135">35</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Due in part to the fruitless ideological battle between mirror images at UNCTAD, one of the more interesting,
      deeper conflicts between the Group of 77 and the United States hardly appeared: the conflict between the assumed
      primacy of the rights of property owners that underlies laissez faire doctrine and the assumed primacy of
      national governments in defining property rights that stands on the surface of the third world's
      interpretation of the economic rights and duties of states found in the U.N. Charter. Even in 1964 there may have
      been some ground for compromise between north and south on this fundamental point. In practice, northern states
      balanced the claims of property owners against other national interests as much as LDCs, in practice, balanced
      their advocacy of the principle of sovereignty against their other interests.{<a id="bck_fn0136" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0136">36</a> ) The UNCTAD debate forced neither north nor south to consciously recognize that they
      balanced their property principles with other concerns, and did so in much the same way. The UNCTAD debate did
      not even require them to discuss such fundamental, substantive concerns.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the UNCTAD meeting the most fully and fruitfully discussed conflicts between north and south occurred not over
      principles but over specific trade policies and trade theory. Unlike in the debate over principles, in
      discussions of those topics most DMCs shared the same views.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the level of practical trade policy north-south differences had abated somewhat even before UNCTAD I, and
      afterward they continued to abate throughout the decade. The IMF's creation of a compensatory financing
      facility illustrates the early move toward greater agreement. Elevation of UNCTAD from a temporary conference to
      a permanent institution of the United Nations created the structure in which commodity agreements could be
      negotiated. Nonetheless, the African proposal for multicommodity agreements remained dormant throughout the
      decade, although the IMP began to investigate ways that its resources might be used to finance buffer
      stocks.(<a id="bck_fn0137" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0137">37</a>) In addition, the wealthier members of the
      GATT gradually accepted the principle of granting tariff preferences to developing nations. It took until the
      1970s before many states passed the legislation that would actually allow such preferences to be awarded.(<a id="bck_fn0138" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0138">38</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      <a id="page_72"></a>None of these developments on the level of practical policy represented any widespread DMC
      acceptance of the empirical trade theory underlying the Group of 77's trade demands. The IMF's
      compensatory financing facility remained committed to the notion that long run trends in the world market
      represented fair prices. Rich states justified generalized tariff preferences as a new form of foreign aid, not
      as step required to increase third world trade income because it had been declining due to the powers of
      companies in DMCs to control world market prices. Even though the GATT Secretariat had provided evidence of the
      decline in the LDCs' proportion of world trade prior to the first UNCTAD, the GATT did not accept the theory
      that there was a trade-related "income gap" that prevented the LDCs from achieving their development
      aims. After the first UNCTAD, the GATT Secretariat reported that Prebisch's measure of this "gap"
      per se meant nothing because of the differences in export needs among LDCs. These differences made it impossible
      that any theory claiming to explain trade problems could be applied to the entire group of nations.(<a id="bck_fn0139" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0139">39</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      On the surface, the GATT position on the trade gap seems to say nothing more than Weintraub's observation
      after the first UNCTAD that the trade gap was not necessarily a fact just because the majority of delegates at
      UNCTAD voted to say it was.(<a id="bck_fn0140" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0140">40</a>) But the GATT position,
      unlike Weintraub's, can be linked directly to Gottfried Haberler's critique of Prebisch's theory.
      Haberler's 1958 GATT report condemning the DMC protectionist policies argued that such policies could cause
      the terms of trade for specific third world goods to decline, but he went on to argue that it was impossible to
      weigh the effects of extra-market interventions on world prices as a whole. The protectionist policies still
      employed by the LDCs might be counteracting the effects of DMC policies or the LDC policies might even be
      improving the terms of trade for some of their goods over the real, free market trend. Case by case analysis
      would be needed in order to determine the actual effects of these interventions. Until such analysis was
      undertaken, Haberler felt this aspect of Prebisch's argument should not be accepted as proven. Haberler also
      argued that it seemed paradoxical to expect that the terms of trade for so many diverse commodities as those sold
      by third world producers would all have the same trend at the same time; again he advocated more detailed study
      of individual cases than the Prebisch reports offered.(<a id="bck_fn0141" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0141">41</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The GATT was right that major differences among LDC economies existed in the sixties. The Group of 77 certainly
      recognized that, at least in its attempt to assure that each state's particular concerns become part of the
      alliance position. But the GATT implied that the differences among third world states provided sufficient reason
      for them to support the ultimate creation of a <a id="page_73"></a>world with no trade restrictions. The south
      rejected that implication. At UNCTAD meetings and the international conferences between them, third world
      governments continued to view the terms of trade problem as one they all shared and as one that could not be
      eliminated simply by moving toward a more open trading system.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0019" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0019">The Group of 77's Politics</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      After the first UNCTAD failed to lead to major changes in global economic regimes, the Group of 77 emphasized
      political victories rather than ones in the realm of economic policy. The group pointed to accomplishments like
      the establishment of rules for further north-south discussions and the creation of the group itself. In fact,
      southern officials considered the institutionalization of the third world alliance to be the most important thing
      UNCTAD achieved.(<a id="bck_fn0142" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0142">42</a>) In terms of the history of the NIEO
      ideology that is certainly true. The institutionalization of the Group of 77 marked the beginning of the third
      period in the ideology's development, the first period in which the third world alliance developed its own
      political analysis.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      UNCTAD I's hottest debate had made the group extremely concerned with unity. DMC proposals that voting in the
      conference be weighted according to trade wealth caught Asian, African, and Latin American delegates off guard.
      There was nothing new in this request. DMCs were only reaffirming the political principles embodied in the
      Bretton Woods system. Yet the demand surprised third world delegates because they saw precedents for UNCTAD not
      in the IMF and World Bank but in the General Assembly and defunct ITO.(<a id="bck_fn0143" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0143">43</a>) The group successfully countered the DMC proposal and make UNCTAD adopt two
      decision-making systems, both of which rejected weighted voting: decision by consensus and decision by majority
      rule of states. But the fact that the debate over decision-making rules could take place at all taught members of
      the group two lessons. They learned that the southern alliance had to agree explicitly upon decision-making
      principles. Moreover, they learned to consult among themselves about strategy and tactics as well as goals in
      order to assure that the south could use its majority effectively.(<a id="bck_fn0144" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0144">44</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In speeches at the first UNCTAD, southern officials equated the political principles they wanted to see the
      conference adopt with "democratic procedures."(<a id="bck_fn0145" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0145">45</a>) This equation suggested that the resolutions of UNCTAD and similar meetings were
      "law" justified by popular sovereignty. (<a id="bck_fn0146" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0146">46</a>)
      If the south had been concerned, first and foremost, with finding the shortest path to increased north-south
      cooperation, the "democratic procedures" slogan would have been a very poor choice. Many officials from
      those DMCs where one person, one vote was more or <a id="page_74"></a>less the rule considered this third world
      concern with "democracy" to be a travesty. Few third world governments even attempted to approach
      democratic representation at home, and all shunned representing equal populations with one vote in international
      organizations.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      However, if we ignore its immediate contribution to greater north-south misunderstanding and concentrate on its
      part in the development of the third world's mobilizing ideology, we can see the progressive role that the
      south's new concern with "democratic procedures" played. It made part of the south's
      unconsciously shared political views very conscious and very public. Arising at the time the Group of 77 itself
      was formed, the dispute over decision-making rules convinced group members that they needed to affirm a
      "political theory," a view of how decisions could and should be made. Developing such political ideas
      meant thinking about how the group's economic ideology could be made dominant. Even the little thought that
      went into quickly responding to the DMCs proposals with calls for more "democratic" means actually
      helped the south. Of course, majority votes in favor of third world proposals could hardly be expected to
      revolutionize the world economic system as long as the system's major supporters did not accept the
      legitimacy of majority rule. On the other hand, structured consensus formation could be used to reform the system
      fundamentally. DMCs would accept such procedures because the north retained its veto.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In promulgating new rules for "conciliation" at the first UNCTAD, the third world experimented with
      what turned out to be a successful means for making some of its views dominant.(<a id="bck_fn0147" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0147">47</a>) More importantly, as a result of debate over political procedures, Group of 77
      members, for the first time, became very aware that they really needed to test various political means and
      consciously repeat successfully employed ones, recognize the limits of their success, and consciously avoid
      repeating fruitless methods. By the end of the decade third world spokesmen knew that the systems of structured
      consensus building first attempted at UNCTAD I were an effective means of obtaining specific concessions from the
      developed nations but an ineffective means for achieving agreement on principles.(<a id="bck_fn0148" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0148">48</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In the years immediately following the first UNCTAD, the Group of 77 hardly built upon the political analysis it
      had so rapidly adopted in 1964. The group continued to work on the basis of "democratic" consensus
      formation with the major economic powers to come to agreements on specific concessions. The group tried to get
      decisions by majority rule when decision by consensus was impossible, but even by the second UNCTAD meeting in
      1968 most LDC governments had started to distance themselves from the ineffective posturing that unenforceable
      majority rule decisions represented.(<a id="bck_fn0149" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0149">49</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      <a id="page_75"></a>Meanwhile, third world perceptions of the need to develop political links within the group
      convinced governments to make existing links more concrete. Between the first UNCTAD and the second, the group
      demonstrated the significance of its unity, and the fact that in certain contexts majority rule decisions could
      be effective, by its ability to unite U.N. aid programs and create the Industrial Development Organization
      (UNIDO) over the objection of DMC governments.(<a id="bck_fn0150" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0150">50</a>) The
      Asian, African, and Latin American conferences of the Group of 77 prior to second UNCTAD resulted on unified
      regional positions. The group's meeting in Algiers prior to the conference easily resolved what differences
      there were in the regional plans. At UNCTAD II the group appointed designated spokesmen to argue their majority
      position.(<a id="bck_fn0151" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0151">51</a>) Nonetheless, neither the majorities that
      the group bothered to muster behind its proposals, nor the consensus-making process, resulted in international
      agreement on fundamental issues.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      After the second disappointing meeting of UNCTAD, the third world's political tactics became more complex,
      third world governments added to the notion of using "democratic means" to advance their position the
      idea that they should consciously attempt to influence elite and public opinion in the developed states. The
      group actually adopted this political tactic while under the influence of DMC elite opinion.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      When former American defense secretary Robert McNamara began his presidency of the World Bank he called upon
      former Canadian prime minister Lester Pearson to form a commission and report to him on international development
      needs. Pearson chose Arthur Lewis and Roberto de Oliveria Campos along with five statesmen from the DMCs to join
      him. Their report, <span class="underline">Partners in Development</span>, ran through four popular printings in
      1969 and 1970 after its first release in 1968.(<a id="bck_fn0152" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0152">52</a>) The
      authors' proposals fundamentally agreed with the Group of 77's. The commission added a concern with
      establishing development related population programs that echoed proposals made by a number of group members but
      that had been rejected as part of the consensus of the group.(<a id="bck_fn0153" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0153">53</a>) Likewise, the Pearson Commission expressed a concern for equalizing the distribution
      of wealth within developing nations. Governments of individual third world states had expressed such views, but
      the group had never collectively accepted them.(<a id="bck_fn0154" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0154">54</a>) At
      the same time, the Pearson Commission affirmed a moral duty of the rich to aid the poor that was compatible with
      the third world views of states' economic rights and duties.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      LDCs praised the Pearson Commission from the outset, although a number of governments demurred over the issue of
      birth control. Many third world U.N. representatives immediately adopted the simple political analysis the
      Pearson Commission report offered for the failure of <a id="page_76"></a>previous international development
      efforts; they represented failures of "political will" on the part of governments, especially DMC
      governments.(<a id="bck_fn0155" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0155">55</a>) The delegate from Cameroon expressed
      the southern view well when he argued that "political will" had created the Marshall Plan and
      "political will" could still create effective international cooperation for economic
      development.(<a id="bck_fn0156" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0156">56</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      To energize DMC political will in 1968, the third world suggested mounting a campaign to influence DMC public
      opinion.(<a id="bck_fn0157" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0157">57</a>) In 1969 Tanzania proposed that legislators
      from the Group of 77 attempt to influence fellow parliamentarians in developed countries to change their
      governments' foreign policies.(<a id="bck_fn0158" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0158">58</a>) The General
      Assembly's extensive Declaration on Social Progress and Development of 1969 reflect both proposals. In
      addition, as part of the campaign to change northern opinion, the General Assembly charged the Secretary General
      with disseminating the declaration as widely as possible.(<a id="bck_fn0159" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0159">59</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Events since 1969 may make us think the third world was naive to believe that public opinion in the north
      mattered. No theory which considered public opinion important appears to have guided the one set of third world
      actions that actually made the most people in the north aware of southern views — i.e., the unpopular OPEC price
      increases. Yet in the U.N. debates of 1968 and 1969 only one member of the group, Sudan, argued that an emphasis
      on influencing DMC public opinion was misguided.(<a id="bck_fn0160" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0160">60</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Events in 1968 made the third world belief in the effectiveness of public and legislative opinion very
      reasonable. An American president had refused to run for another term when it became clear to him that the public
      and Congress would no longer support his foreign policy approach. Mass demonstrations almost toppled the French
      government. Moreover, the liberal western political theories that a majority of third world leaders had learned
      and still accepted, in theory if not in practice, identified the opinions and goals of mass publics and their
      representatives as the proper source of foreign policy, and, much more importantly, as the actual source of
      foreign policy in those states with active liberal political institutions, the DMCs.(<a id="bck_fn0161" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0161">61</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Despite these good reasons for attempting to influence DMC opinion, third world attempts to energize northern
      political will remained small operations throughout the sixties. The only resources committed to the effort were
      those of the U.N. agencies, the Secretary General's office and UNCTAD in particular. Yet this small-scale
      expression of concern with influencing DMC opinion had effects on the emerging DMC ideology beyond the simple
      fact that it happened to be one of the earliest bits of political theory the Group of 77 collectively and
      consciously adopted. Like moves toward strengthening the alliance itself, attempting to <a id="page_77"></a>influence the attitudes of people within DMCs required LDC supporters to present their opinions
      about the world economy in a more unified and coherent, and thus more convincing, form. It required third world
      leaders to make their ideology even more explicit and distinct.
    </div>

    <h2 id="ht0020" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0020">More New Economic Issues for the
    South</a></h2>

    <div class="text_indent">
      However, the real diversity of interests within the third world mitigated against the development of a more
      explicit, coherent, and convincing ideology in the late sixties. That diversity had been made greater by new
      economic issues. The Bretton Woods system's heyday of income and trade growth affected different third world
      states in different ways. While the Group of 77 was able to respond to the new issues by creating hypothetical
      programs that would have provided some benefits to every third world state if they were enacted, the group had
      trouble finding ways to logically link all the new programs they proposed in a single, coherent economic policy
      analysis. The group could easily blame some of the new problems on the Bretton Woods system; analysis of those
      problems could be easily integrated into the ideology. Those problems that could not be so easily blamed on the
      system were much harder to coherently link to the rest of the ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The increasing lack of coherence in the ideology's policy analysis became all the more problematic because
      the south's solidarity behind a single interpretation of the economic rights and duties of states began to
      break. In the late sixties had enlarged the third world alliance to included governments that defined the
      economic duties of wealthy states as responsibilities incumbent upon them because of their past or current
      colonialism. Potentially, this opinion could have wrecked the ideological foundation of the third world alliance
      by opening up ethical questions which had be closed for years. Instead, members of the group simply stopped
      reiterating one part of the ethical foundation of their analysis. They continued to discuss the the economic
      <span class="underline">rights</span> of states in general terms as well as the specific duties of wealthy
      states, including a duty they newly agreed was incumbent upon colonizers, like Portugal and South Africa, to
      compensate for their colonialism. But, in the late 1960s the south ignore its older argument that the general,
      permanent duty of every state to unique economic development of other states provided the major reason why
      material aid could be demanded from the wealthy.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      While members of the Group of 77 never publically confronted each other with demands to debate their different
      moral codes the disagreement over principles reinforced newly developing conflicts of interest within <a id="page_78"></a>the alliance. Poorer LDCs supported one ethic; richer LDCs supported another. Without a unifying
      view of the economic rights and duties of states it became hard for LDCs to argue that all the new problems
      separate states experienced in the 1960s should be with under the same agenda. This reassured those supporters of
      the existing economic system who believed that third world calls for a "new" economic system were
      inherently incoherent. Even if, as the third world argued, there were some unfortunate unintended consequences
      resulting from the operation of the Bretton Woods system, those problems appeared to be localized ones that in no
      way changed the evaluation of the Bretton Woods system offered by its strongest advocates: Under the system world
      trade and economic growth had expanded like they never had before, and they had done so at the expense of no
      nation.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Of course, third world states measured the costs of the Bretton Woods system not against systems that had gone
      before but against the expected costs of the reformed system they wanted to see created. In those terms, they
      could argue that the actual system had unexpected costs that only some states had borne.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Throughout the sixties third world governments linked their analyses of the disadvantages of the IMF and World
      Bank. Functionally, both institutions seemed the same to many hard-pressed governments. Both provided loans that
      could be used to meet government expenses. Likewise, third world leaders thought of the bilateral aid systems in
      the same terms. The bilateral aid systems functioned as part of the world economic order, the Bretton Woods
      system broadly understood. In the sixties four new effects of the postwar aid and monetary order came to bother
      third world governments.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      As we have seen, those less industrialized countries that actually did receive loans for development in the
      fifties had trouble repaying their debts, especially when that had taking out short term loans to finance the
      sort of infrastructure projects the south most demanded in the fifties. Such projects showed no immediate profit
      and mounting debt became even more difficult to pay back since third world trade remained stagnant.(<a id="bck_fn0162" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0162">62</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      At the opposite end of the spectrum of wealth, the poorest LDCs felt the aid system led to the increasing
      relative impoverishment of the LLDCs relative to other states. LLDCs received a small proportion of available
      aid. The World Bank's understandable concern with its own financial health meant that prior to the creation
      of the IDA it loaned mostly to states that could easily pay their debts, states that were relatively wealthy
      already.(<a id="bck_fn0163" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0163">63</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world governments identified a similar problem associated with world liquidity. Because the U.S. dollar had
      been the world<sup class="item2">'</sup>s most accepted currency since the war the U.S. could expand global
      liquidity accumulating trade <a id="page_79"></a>deficits for goods Americans purchased abroad. Consequently, the
      initial benefits of expanding the amount of money in global circulation went to the United States, the wealthiest
      state; and because the U.S.'s most important trade partners were DMCs, the multiplier effects of increasingly
      global liquidity were extended almost exclusively to the DMCs, thus, in the third world view, increasing the
      relative poverty of the LDCs. (<a id="bck_fn0164" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0164">64</a>) When the IMF moved
      toward creating an internationally managed means for expanding global liquidity in the latter half of the decade
      ·— through IMF Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) — IMF member allocated those funds on the basis of the IMF quotas
      used to compute voting weights. This system had almost the same effect as the pure dollar standard. It gave most
      of the initial advantages of increasing the global money supply to the already wealthy regions.(<a id="bck_fn0165" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0165">65</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world states first raised one final, related issue in the sixties. Those third world states that had taken
      advantage of bilateral aid began to draw attention to the economic strings attached to economic aid in the same
      way that they first had brought attention to political strings in the 1950s. Requirements that aid be used to
      purchase goods from donor countries — goods that could often be purchased at lower prices elsewhere — especially
      bothered them. Beyond the simple economic disadvantages of these arrangements when compared to the multilateral
      aid systems the south had advocated since the forties, the economic strings attached to bilateral aid increased
      the recipient economy's dependence on that of the donor.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      As we have seen, the third world's solutions to the new aid problems they discovered in the sixties were
      similar to the solutions they offered to similar problems in the fifties. Because they blamed those aid problems
      on the Bretton Woods system, they simply used their existing principles and plans for an alternative system in
      order to understand and suggest solutions to the new problems. Under their long standing principles, the south
      emphasized the special responsibility of all states to aid the LLDCs and defined the minimal material
      responsibility of the developed nations with the aid target of 1 percent of GNP. In addition, the south acted to
      assure that the U.N.'s Special Fund and technical assistance programs would be coordinated and directed
      toward third world industrialization, thus creating a model for the multilateral aid system the south desired.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      To third world leaders, inadequacies in the existing system also explained the new monetary problems they
      experienced. In again blaming Bretton Woods third world leaders, sought solutions to the new monetary problems in
      slight amendments to their own emerging vision of an alternative system. They talked about expanding the IMF so
      that it became, in part, an aid agency. They proposed <a id="page_80"></a>that any new international liquidity
      created by the IMF be allocated to states on the basis of some measure of economic need.(<a id="bck_fn0166" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0166">66</a>) This proposal went back to ideas on the subject advanced in the 1950s
      by Maxwell Stamp, the British director of the IMF, and from there back to Lord Keynes's bag of hypothetical
      economic tricks and to the alternative vision of the postwar system which had been the basis for the third
      world's own policy analysis.(<a id="bck_fn0167" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0167">67</a>) The south justified
      the proposed "Link" in the same way they justified other aid programs, as a way for wealthy states to
      fufill their duty to materially aid the economic development plans chosen by those less advantaged.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Supporters of the Bretton Woods system never denied that the system in part "caused" the four new aid
      and monetary problems that third world states experienced in the sixties. Supporters did deny that the things
      that "caused" the problems were problems in themselves. Instead, they saw them as necessary elements in
      any truly workable aid and money regimes. The problems experienced by the richest and poorest LDCs were
      unfortunate, but, Bretton Woods system advocates argued, no state or private investor would give development
      loans if they did not expect them to be repaid. True, supporters argued, the unique role of the U.S. in expanding
      world liquidity had never been carefully planned, but the fact that it (somewhat surprisingly) worked was reason
      enough to maintain the principle it embodied of expanding liquidity to nations on the basis of their economic
      might. Likewise, many leaders saw tying aid to repurchase agreements as a small domestic political price that
      rich countries had to pay in order to offer any aid at all. To supporters of Bretton Woods, these were less
      problems than facts, and certainly they were not the basis for new grievances with the existing order.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Third world spokesmen in the sixties did not try to respond to northern doubts about the reality of the new aid
      and money problems the south faced. They might have been able to do so by explaining how the emerging
      hypothetical alternative to Bretton Woods would insure things like investor confidence and popular support for
      aid from within DMCs, but it had been hard enough to integrate these new issues into the third world's own
      prior understanding. Yet these aid and money issues were easier to integrate into the southern consensus than
      another set of problems third world states experienced in the sixties, ones that could not be blamed so easily on
      the Bretton Woods system. Had third world officials been more willing to grant the Bretton Woods system its
      successes they might have been able to see this final set of new problems as like their new aid and money
      problems: unintended byproducts of the postwar system's operation.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The increasingly liberal trade system that the postwar regimes advanced provided opportunities for large <a id="page_81"></a>firms to invest abroad with greater ease than ever before. Of course, individually, almost every
      country around the world also encouraged such investment. By the end of the sixties, nevertheless, most third
      world states expressed some dissatisfactions with their relationships to what the U.N. Secretariat had dubbed in
      mid-decade "transnational corporations," TNCs.(<a id="bck_fn0168" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0168">68</a>) Third world representatives complained of profits being repatriated in excess of the
      funds brought into the country by foreign firms, and of the difficulties in assuring that foreign investors
      followed the guidelines set out in national development plans.(<a id="bck_fn0169" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0169">69</a>) While third world spokesmen did not try to explain the rise of TNCs, the southern
      ethic suggested where solutions to their problems with TNCs might be found. It pointed toward finding the means
      to assure that the self-defined interests of states remained sovereign in relations with foreign firms. But the
      1960s closed not only before the south developed a shared analysis of the rise of TNCs but also before they even
      came to share views about how to combat the problems foreign investment created. The south turned over the
      problem of developing such analysis to the United Nations secretariats.(<a id="bck_fn0170" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0170">70</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      A somewhat similar problem, "the brain drain," also became a third world issue in the sixties. The
      successes of the liberal international system helped make it possible for highly skilled people from poorer
      countries to find and move to jobs in the richest parts of the world. In the sixties third world governments saw
      the brain drain as a problem, but the Group of 77 offered no analysis of its origins or specific programs for
      eliminating it or its effects.(<a id="bck_fn0171" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0171">71</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      A sort of obverse of the brain drain became a new issue in the sixties as well. Skilled people left poorer
      countries to go to wealthier ones, but that transfer was not balanced by the transfer of skills and technology
      from the rich to the poor. The postwar international economic system treated technological innovations like any
      other property. Governments of poorer countries could have access to new technology only through the market, by
      buying patent rights or encouraging the owners of those rights to invest in the poor country. In the sixties,
      however, before the role of the Bretton Woods system as a protector of existing property rights had been openly
      and loudly debated, the third world raised their concerns about increasing "technology transfers"
      without linking those concerns to specific condemnations of existing regimes. Rather, third world governments
      proposed the existence of a new "right to the fruits of technology," a proposal to treat know-how as a
      common good, a collective resource that no individual could claim an ultimate property right to control.(<a id="bck_fn0172" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0172">72</a>) In later years discussion of this view would open up the
      north-south debate over <a id="page_82"></a>limits on the roles of international economic management
      organizations that was never opened at the UNCTAD conferences or at other meetings in the sixties. In the
      sixties, beyond the simple affirmation that this new right — an extension of the rights and duties of states —
      existed, the third world had little more to say about easing the transfer of technology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The TNC, brain drain, and technology transfer issues would have contributed little to the increasing incoherence
      of the third world's "new" ideology had the Group of 77 been able to remain solidly behind the view
      of states economic rights and duties they had long shared, the ideas that justified the first southern views on
      these new issues. But the Group of 77 did not remain solidly behind its oldest principles at the end of the
      1960s. Paradoxically, decolonization, which increased the number of states in the third world, proved the
      greatest threat to the alliance's unity. Unity could only be restored, in the short run, by deemphasizing the
      older principles.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Governments of the newer states, mostly African, explained the duties of developed states to make extra efforts
      on behalf of the globe's poor in a markedly different way than older members of the third world alliance
      explained the same duty. The more radical African governments in the early sixties, following those of Guinea and
      Ghana, consistently spoke of duties imposed on wealthy states by the fact that they had once exploited their
      colonies.(<a id="bck_fn0173" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0173">73</a>) The former colonizers owed a debt to the
      colonized. Africans suggested many historical precedents for such notions, including the compensation paid by the
      American government to former slaves, the more significant twentieth century precedent of the war debts paid by
      those who lost the world wars, and the debts paid by the Federal Republic of Germany to Jewish citizens and to
      the state of Israel.(<a id="bck_fn0174" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0174">74</a>) Franz Fanon's <span class="underline">The Wretched of the Earth</span>, published in the early sixties, expressed this view well:
    </div>

    <div class="quotes1">
      When we hear the head of a European state declare with his hand on his heart that he must come to the aid of poor
      underdeveloped people we do not tremble with gratitude. Quite the contrary; we say to ourselves: "It's a
      just reparation which will be paid to us."(<a id="bck_fn0175" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0175">75</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_noindent">
      During the sixties this theme was taken up by representatives of many new states both within and outside of
      Africa in such a way that latent divisions among third world states became apparent.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      If this ethic of reparations were to be accepted in lieu of the notion of permanent states' economic rights
      and duties, then either many of the early members of the third world movement, including the Latin American
      <a id="page_83"></a>states, would have no claim to aid from wealthy-countries, or else the relevant historical
      period for assessing debts would have to be pushed back to the beginning of the modern world economy. In the
      later case the analytical distinction in the third world ideology that colonialism was the basic early cause of
      underdevelopment would be given moral force as well. Few nations accepted this particular resolution of the
      differences between newer and older members of the alliance in the sixties. Latin American delegates to
      international meetings, in particular, almost never used the historical argument from colonialism as a
      justification for the duties of wealthy states.(<a id="bck_fn0176" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0176">76</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In peculiar contrast, some wealthy states used the restitution ethic to justify their lack of action-in support
      of the LDCs. By the 1968 second UNCTAD the socialist states of eastern Europe, which had appeared to be so
      cooperative to the third world at UNCTAD I, had adopted the restitution ethic. They said that their duties
      differed from those of the DMCs because as socialist states they neither had been colonizers nor had they
      exploited poorer countries through the instruments of neocolonialism. (<a id="bck_fn0177" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0177">77</a>) Neocolonialism, after all, had been linked only to capitalism by the popularizer of
      the concept, Kwame Nkrumah.(<a id="bck_fn0178" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0178">78</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      After they learned the position that the socialists would take, Group of 77 members reunited behind at least that
      part of their old ethic that said all rich states had duties to poor ones. The Charter of Algiers, agreed to
      before UNCTAD II, reflected that part of the earlier stand without ever mentioning reparations for
      colonialism.(<a id="bck_fn0179" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0179">79</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      This charter makes specific demands upon the socialist states. Nonetheless, it devotes no space to outlining the
      general ethic for international economic relations. In one sense, this lack of the usual restatement of the
      general ethic could be interpreted as just reflecting a recognition that the principles of the new economic order
      had already been stated at the first UNCTAD and voting on them again at the second would just be an example of a
      fruitless use of the Group of 77's majority. Now was the time to "move away from the stage of
      deliberation to the plane of practical action. "(<a id="bck_fn0180" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0180">80</a>) But, by not explicitly restating the older understanding of the economic rights and
      duties of states and saying that they were the only fundamental principles for the new order, the Group of 77
      left room for some of its members to argue for aid on the basis of the restitution ethic.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Two factors continued to assure that the dispute over the restitution ethic would generate further developments
      in the south's ideology. First, most of the LDCs to which the ethic appealed were also LLDCs, those that were
      the most dependent on exports of commodities <a id="page_84"></a>that sold in what they believed to be
      particularly wild, fluctuating markets, and those that received the least foreign aid. This was the group of
      countries some scholars in the north started to call the "fourth world," the poorest nations whose
      economic interests differed from those of the wealthier third world states. The restitution ethic symbolized the
      particularly severe problems of the least advantaged. Second, the ideological predilictions of many of those
      people sympathetic to the LDCs in rich countries made them more sympathetic to the restitution argument than to
      the one based upon assumed permanent rights and duties of states. Jean Paul Sartre exemplifies this northern view
      in his preface to <span class="underline">The Wretched of the Earth</span> where he argues that the shame
      Europeans feel when confronted with knowledge of the worst horrors of colonialism would make them accept
      Fanon's view that restitution was essential.(<a id="bck_fn0181" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0181">81</a>)
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Yet at the end of the sixties, when third world states first mounted an effort to influence public and elite
      opinion in the north, they did not rely on the powerful restitution ethic because not all third world states
      shared it. The 1969 Declaration on Social Progress and Development, which was supposed to be so widely
      distributed, exemplifies the moral compromises the alliance had to reach at the end of the decade. (<a id="bck_fn0182" href="Ch03.xhtml#fn0182">82</a>) Its second and third articles lay out the by then
      traditional rights of states. Its first, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh articles lay out specific egalitarian
      rights of individuals and families. The bulk of the rest of the document lays out only specific duties of
      governments, some of governments in developed countries, some of governments in developing countries. Article 26
      specifies that restitution for aggression and illegal occupation must be paid by the aggressor state. But this
      article does not say that back payments for colonialism that had ended was necessary. All the specific UNCTAD
      principles of 1964 are included as specific duties. What is missing in this program, as in the Charter of
      Algiers, is an overarching article explaining all these duties of developed states under a single justification
      -- either as specific instances of a duty to aid the unique economic development of the neediest or as specific
      instances of a duty to provide reparations for colonialism.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In some ways, of course, this loose definition of the duties of developed states, this lack of an overarching
      article, contributed to the later success of the ideology in attracting supporters in the developed world. Third
      world silence on the ultimate moral ground of northern duties under their new economic order allowed northern
      supporters to choose their own justification. Like Sartre, they could emphasize a duty based on historical rights
      violated during colonialism. Like Pearson, they could emphasize a general, ahistorical duty <a id="page_85"></a>of wealthy states. Nevertheless, the person in the developed countries who was not yet sympathetic
      to the plight of the LDCs could find as many contradictions in the late-1960s version of the third world position
      as sympathizers could find justifications for creating a new economic order.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      This incoherence in the third world view at the end of the decade made it difficult for those who first observed
      global economic meetings then to see the "third world" as a reality. Identifying a "third world
      ideology" from a single meeting at the end of the sixties would be just as difficult. Just as the new order
      ideology had been temporarily lost in the cooperative north-south dialogue at the beginning of the
      "development decade," the disagreements within the south at decade's end made statements of their
      common position increasingly vague, abstract, and indistinct. Observation of the common third world position at
      any point in the decade other than its very beginning and end would yield an entirely different picture. The new
      order ideology remained distinct throughout most of the sixties.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      It passed through two separate stages of growth just as significant as the first stage it had passed through
      while the Bretton Woods system was forming. The second and third stages, like the first one, were characterized
      by fundamentally new issues that members of the third world alliance were learning to apprehend in the same way.
      During the whole decade southern adherents to the new order ideology reiterated their consensus about the
      economic problems that the Bretton Woods system left unresolved and added to it an analysis of what to do about
      new problems that the operation of the Bretton Woods system helped create. In the first half of the decade, the
      second stage in the development of the ideology, only these new problems related to the system's operation
      served to trigger ideological innovation.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The second half of the decade, the third stage in the ideology's development, was more eventful. Adherents
      consciously defined their collective political identity, made the further specification of their shared views a
      conscious goal, and began to develop strategies to make their views dominant. Of course the third world had a
      collective identity by 1959, but conscious reflection on that identity, which was needed before further
      specification of shared views could be made a conscious goal, only came with the formation of the Group of 77 and
      the subsequent development of political strategy which marked the third stage.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The fact that reflection upon their collective identity had become commonplace for group members by the end of
      the decade made it possible for them to consciously redefine that identity in order to assure group unity. When
      the ideological conflicts between the richer and poorer developing states appeared at the end <a id="page_86"></a>of the decade members of the group could make their shared views more amorphous to accommodate the
      conflicting views. That made the group's ideology look less coherent. But a more significant commitment to
      consciously developing a shared position remained the foundation for the group's stated views, even at the
      end of the sixties. Reinforced by strategic commitment to group unity that developed as a conscious political
      tactic in the late sixties, the ability to reflect upon and redefine what it meant to be "the third
      world" allowed the alliance to rapidly turn their position, which was temporarily amorphous at the end of
      the sixties, into the much more coherent and concrete calls for a New International Economic Order that dominated
      the seventies.
    </div>

    <div class="footnote">
      <h2 id="ht0021" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0021">Notes</a></h2>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0101">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0101">(1)</a>Patino speaking at <span class="underline">Secon</span>d, 18,
        Oct. 4, 1963, p. 27; Sidney Weintraub, "After the U.N. Trade Conference: Lessons and Portents,"
        Foreign Affairs 43 (Oct. 1964): 46.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0102">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0102">(2)</a>GATT, <span class="underline">International Trade 1966</span>
        (Geneva: 1967).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0103">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0103">(3)</a>Quoted by the Indian delegate at Second, 13, Oct. 18, 1958, p.
        45.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0104">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0104">(4)</a> See e.g. the <span class="underline">Economis</span>t's
        editorials cited in chapter 1, note 95.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0105">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0105">(5)</a>This was a Bolivian suggestion, Second, 12, Oct. 27, 1958, p.
        87.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0106">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0106">(6)</a>GATT, <span class="underline">International Trade 1960</span>
        (Geneva: 1961), pp. 7-10. See also Undersecretary de Seynes's report on trade, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15, Oct. 12, 1960, pp. 7-9.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0107">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0107">(7T</a>s'audi Arabia, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15,
        Oct. 18, 1960, p. 100.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0108">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0108">(8)</a>Colombia, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15, Oct. 28,
        1960, p. 114.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0109">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0109">(9)</a>Raul Prebisch, "The Economic Development of Latin America
        and Its Principal Problems," <span class="underline">Economic Bulletin</span> for Latin America 7 (Feb.
        1962): 1-22.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0110">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0110">(10)</a>On the third world view see Mexico, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15, Oct. 28, 1960, p. 110 and Turkey, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15,
        Nov. 1, 1960, p. 123.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0111">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0111">(11)</a>See the appeal by Uruguay to U.N. members to live up to
        Charter duties by instituting "equitable treatment," <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15, Oct.
        27, 1960, p. 87.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0112">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0112">(12)</a>G. Aforka Nwekwe, <span class="underline">Harmonization of
        African Foreign Policies 195-1975: The Political Economy of African Diplomacy</span> (Boston: Boston Univ.
        African Studies Center), p. 94-107.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0113">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0113">(13)</a>Selected Documents, Belgrade Declaration of Non-Aligned
        Countries, Sept. 6, 1961, p. 9.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0114">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0114">(14)</a>Second, 16, Oct. 20, 1961, p. 76.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0115">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0115">(15)</a>GATT, <span class="underline">International Trade 1961</span>
        (Geneva: 1962), pp. 20-28.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0116">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0116">(16)</a>John A. Pincus, <span class="underline">Trade, Aid, and
        Development</span> (New <a id="page_87"></a>York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1967), pp. 126-27.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0117">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0117">(17)</a> Branislav Gosovic, <span class="underline">UNCTAD Conflict
        and Compromise</span> (Leiden: A. W. Sijthoff, 1972), pp. 15-21.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0118">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0118">(18)</a>E.g., Tunisia, <span class="underline">Seco</span>nd 15, Nov.
        1, 1960.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0119">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0119">(19)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 17, Oct. 17, 1962, p.
        72. This was first suggested in the U.N. by Krishna Menon, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15, Nov. 11,
        1960, p. 195.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0120">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0120">(20)</a>See e.g., Chile, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 18,
        Oct. 16, 1963, p. 106.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0121">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0121">(21)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 17, Oct. 4, 1962, pp.
        19-20.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0122">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0122">(22)</a>Joshua, 9:21.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0123">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0123">(23)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Charter of
        Alta Gracia, Mar. 7, 1964, pp. 29-31.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0124">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0124">(24)</a>Se<span class="underline">lected Documents</span>, Niamey
        Resolution on the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development, Dec. 13, 1963, pp. 20-21.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0125">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0125">(25)</a>See the short intellectual history in the annex to the group
        of experts report on the structure of the United Nations system, <span class="underline">A New United Nations
        Structure for</span> Global Economic Cooperation (New York: United Nations, 1975), pp. 61-69.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0126">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0126">(26)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 18, Oct. 8, 1963, p.
        57.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0127">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0127">(27)</a>Raul Prebisch, <span class="underline">Towards a New Trade
        Policy for Development</span> (New York: UNCTAD, 1964); on the report as the conference agenda see A. D.
        Friedeberg, <span class="underline">The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development: The Theory of the
        Peripheral Economy at the Centre of International</span> Discussions (Rotterdam: Rotterdam Univ. Press, 1969),
        pp. 70-84.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0128">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0128">(28)</a>Compare Friedeberg's discussion above with the UNCTAD
        principles in <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, UNCTAD I: Final Act and Recommendations, June
        15, 1964, pp. 43-50.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0129">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0129">(29)</a><span class="underline">Selected_Documents</span>, UNCTAD I:
        Final Act and Recommendations, June 15, 1964, pp. 43-47.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0130">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0130">(30)</a>Weintraub, p. 52.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0131">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0131">(31)</a>Hence Patino's remark quoted at the head of the chapter.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0132">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0132">(32)</a>Gosovic, p. 164.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0133">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0133">(33)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 165.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0134">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0134">(34)</a>Urie Bronfenbrenner, "The Mirror Image in Soviet-American
        Relations: A Social Psychologist's Report," <span class="underline">Journal of Social Issues</span>
        17, no. 3 (1961):45-56.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0135">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0135">(35)</a>Gosovic, p. 166, note 42.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0136">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0136">(36)</a>See, for example, the general argument about the United States
        in Stephen D. Krasner, <span class="underline">Defending the National Interest</span> (Princeton: Princeton
        Univ. Press, 1978).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0137">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0137">(37)</a>Margaret Garritsen de Vries, The IMF 1966-71: The <span class="underline">System Under Stress</span>, vol. 1 (Washington: IMF, 1976), pp. 269-76.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0138">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0138">(3S)</a>Explicit GATT acceptance of this notion was quite
        straightforward by the mid-1970s. See <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Tokyo Declaration,
        Sept. 14, 1973, pp. 444-49.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0139">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0139">(39)</a>GATT, <span class="underline">International Trade 1965</span>
        (Geneva: 1966), p. <a id="page_88"></a>19.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0140">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0140">(40)</a>Weintraub, p. 48.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0141">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0141">(41 )</a>Friedeberg summarizes Haberler's criticisms, pp. 53-56.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0142">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0142">(42)</a><span class="underline">Selected Pocamente</span>, Joint
        Declaration of the Group of 77 at UNCTAD I, June 15, 1964, p, 33.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0143">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0143">(43)</a>Gosovic, pp. 52-57.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0144">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0144">{44)</a>See the penultimate paragraph of the Joint Declaration,
        <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, p. 34.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0145">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0145">(4 5)</a>See the affirmation in <span class="underline">Selected
        Documents</span>, Cairo Declaration of the Non-Aligned Countries, Oct. 10, 1964, p. 94.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0146">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0146">(46)</a>See Gosovic's analysis, p. 57.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0147">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0147">(47)</a>On the creation of these consensus or "conciliation"
        procedures see Gosovic, pp. 56-57, and see pp. 171-72 on concessions the south obtained.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0148">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0148">(48)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, p. 172,
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0149">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0149">(49)</a>Consider, e.g., the Nigerian statement in the Second Committee
        during planning for UNCTAD II. Instead of calling for new principles, the way Nigerian's had when they
        helped lead the call for UNCTAD in the early part of the decade, he emphasized conciliation procedures and
        demanded that the UNCTAD agenda be very specific, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 22, Oct. 4, 1967, p.
        16.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0150">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0150">(50)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span> General
        Assembly Resolution 2152: United Nations Industrial Development Program, Nov. 17, 1966, p. 843. UNIDO
        coordinates policy with the U.N. Development Program and the U.N. Capital Development fund which provides
        multilateral aid through voluntary contributions by U.N. members. The capital development fund was created at
        the same time as UNIDO.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0151">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0151">(51)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Charter of
        Algiers, Oct. 24, 1967, pp. 135-45, c.f. the Nigerian speech, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 22, Oct.
        4, 1967, p. 16.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0152">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0152">(52)</a>Lester Pearson, ed., <span class="underline">Partners in
        Development</span> (New York: Praeger, 1969).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0153">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0153">(53)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., pp. 56-57.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0154">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0154">(54)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., pp. 7-10.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0155">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0155">(55)</a><span class="underline">Ibid</span>., pp. 3-32.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0156">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0156">(56)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 23, Oct. 14, 1968, p.
        7.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0157">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0157">(57)</a>Indonesia, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 23, Oct. 11,
        1968, p. 2.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0158">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0158">(58)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 24, Oct. 16, 1969, p.
        30.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0159">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0159">(59)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, General
        Assembly Resolution 2543: Implementation of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, Dec. 11, 1969,
        p. 855.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0160">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0160">(60)</a><span class="underline">Second</span>, 24, Oct. 15, 1969, p.
        19.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0161">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0161">(61)</a>See Chinweizu's emotional account of these beliefs among
        members of Africa's elite in the independence generation, "The Cult of Liberal Democracy,"
        <span class="underline">The West and the Rest of Us</span> (New York: Random House, 19751, pp. 234-46.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0162">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0162">(62)</a>At the 1966 meeting of the Second Committee India forecast
        that debt servicing payments for the third world would be greater than incoming aid in less than fifteen <a id="page_89"></a>years. <span class="underline">Second</span>, Oct. 13, 1966, p. 20.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0163">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0163">(63)</a>See chapter 1, note 91.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0164">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0164">(64)</a>The early discussions in the U.N. along these lines took place
        in 1966. See the Syrian speech, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 21, Oct. 14, 1966, p. 69.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0165">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0165">(65)</a>See the Algerian speech, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 24, Oct. 20, 1969, p. 61.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0166">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0166">(66)</a>This proposal was contained in an IMF report discussed by the
        delegate from Sudan, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 21, Oct. 17, 1966, p. 85.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0167">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0167">(67)</a>An <span class="underline">Economist</span> editorial of July
        27, 1963 issue (p. 34), suggests increasing global liquidity simply by giving needed aid to poorer states. The
        editors distinguish this proposal slightly from Stamp's. Stamp would have the actual level of international
        trade determine the level of increased liquidity in the system, although an aid element would be introduced by
        giving much of that new liquidity to poorer states.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0168">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0168">(68)</a>By Undersecretary de Seynes reporting to the Second Committee,
        <span class="underline">Second</span>, 20, Oct. 5, 1965, p. 7.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0169">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0169">(69)</a>Cuba had raised these issues at the beginning of the decade,
        Second,. 15, Oct. 27, I960, p. 94, but few other states mentioned TNCs in the U.N. until the late sixties.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0170">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0170">(70)</a>In 1968 the Asian Regional Conference of the International
        Labor Organization urged the organization's staff to address questions of TNCs. In the same year U.S.
        members of the organization urged a similar study. Thus that organization studied the relationship between TNCs
        and social policy before UNCTAD or the Economic and Social Council did. The later began their work in 1972.
        U.N. Department of Social and Economic Affairs, <span class="underline">Multinational Corporations in World
        Development</span> (New York: United Nations, 1973), pp. 116-17.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0171">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0171">(71)</a>The first U.N. discussion of the brain drain was triggered by
        Iran, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 22, Oct. 15, 1967, p. 50.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0172">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0172">(72)</a>Oscar Schacter, <span class="underline">Sharing the
        World's Resources</span> (New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1977), pp. 105-24. Schacter's primary concern
        is with the broader legal and ethical questions suggested by the issue.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0173">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0173">(73)</a><span class="underline">Ibid.</span>, pp. 20-21.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0174">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0174">(74)</a>Ghana, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 15, Oct. 20,
        1960, p. 35; Guinea, <span class="underline">Second</span>, 16, Oct. 18, 1961, p. 49.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0175">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0175">(75)</a>Franz Fanon, <span class="underline">The Wretched of the
        Earth</span> (New York: Grove Press, 1968), p. 102.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0176">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0176">(76)</a>Latin American delegates rarely use the argument that wealthy
        nations were obligated to repay for colonialism. They do argue that a history of colonialism is a cause of
        underdevelopment and that the wealth of the developed states obligates the developed states to aid the
        underdeveloped.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0177">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0177">(77)</a>See Gosovic, p. 166, and the strong statement of this position
        in <span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, Joint Statement of the Socialist Countries on the Second
        Development Decade <a id="page_90"></a>and Social Progress, Sept. 21, 1970, pp. 204-207.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0178">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0178">(78)</a>Kwame Nkrumah, <span class="underline">Neocolonialism, The
        Last Stage of Imperialism</span> (London: Nelson, 1965).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0179">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0179">(79)</a>The Charter of Algiers eschewed the moral justifications found
        in previous third world statements and replaced them with a discussion of third world poverty and the failure
        of previous international efforts to reduce it.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0180">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0180">(80)</a>Selected Documents, Charter of Algiers, Oct. 24, 1967, p. 136.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0181">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0181">(81)</a>Jean Paul Sartre, Preface to Fanon's <span class="underline">The Wretched of the Earth</span>, pp. 7-34.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0182">
        <a href="Ch03.xhtml#bck_fn0182">(82)</a><span class="underline">Selected Documents</span>, General
        Assembly Resolution 2542: Declaration on Social Progress and Development, Dec. 11, 1969, pp. 850-54.
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
