<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Emergence Of The Nieo Ideology</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <h1 id="ht0050" class="h1_title"><a id="page_181"></a><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0050">Afterword: How
    Ideas Can Help Resolve the North-South Conflict</a></h1>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Any historical study leads to conclusions that can be documented and to others that cannot. This afterword
      contains my more speculative conclusions about the new order ideology. They cannot be supported by a weight of
      evidence because they do not concern what the ideology has been; they concern what it might become. I believe the
      NIEO ideology might someday contribute knowledge needed to resolve the current north-south conflict.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In abstract terms, the conflict will be resolved when the Bretton Woods system or its successor learns to deal
      with the south's economic problems as well as it deals with the north's. If we can say that the the new
      order ideology performs functions of "consciousness" for the third world, we can similarly say that
      those who act for the Bretton Woods system share a consciousness, of which the dominant ideology is part. What
      Deutsch's framework would have us call the "consciousness" of that system just equals what other
      scholars would call the "complex regime" containing the Bretton Woods institutions. In that regime the
      dominant ideology provides rules and guides for behavior and the Bretton Woods institutions help keep the regime
      open to new information. Understood in that way, as Ernst Haas illustrates, a regime is the locus of a capacity
      to learn how to manage fundamentally new problems even while it remains the consciousness consulted by those who
      manage a particular global issue.(<a id="bck_fn0403" href="Ch07.xhtml#fn0403">l</a>) I believe, then,
      that the new order ideology and the experience of its southern advocates can help the postwar management system
      learn to deal effectively with the south's problems. That would transform the postwar institutions and
      require transformation of the dominant ideology.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Two equally speculative arguments suggest the new order ideology's capacity to contribute knowledge needed to
      manage global economic problems more effectively. One highlights the dilemmas third world advocates often face as
      a result of their contradictory positions in world society and within their home countries. According to one of
      the doyens of the policy sciences, Duncan MacRae, <a id="page_182"></a>people in such contradictory roles are
      likely to produce positive social innovations.(<a id="bck_fn0404" href="Ch07.xhtml#fn0404">2</a>) The
      NIEO ideology's third world advocates live at the intersection between the cultures of the world's
      wealthy and the cultures of its most impoverished. They try consciously to resolve the contradictions between the
      two. More than any other group, they are likely to develop ways to resolve those contradictions.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      In an entirely different way, the simple fact that NIEO advocates have been opposing the current system for
      almost forty years may have given them some of the knowledge the system itself needs. Immanuel Wallerstein, who
      began his career by looking for the commonalities among all the different successful nationalist movements in
      Africa, claims that the weaker party in any protracted struggle will know more about their relationship to the
      stronger than the stronger party will.(<a id="bck_fn0405" href="Ch07.xhtml#fn0405">3</a>) The NIEO's
      advocates may know some things about the world economy that adherents to the dominant ideology have never
      learned.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Whatever wisdom about the world economy the third world may have acquired in its forty year conflict with the
      north, however, will not influence actual intergovernmental economic management until north and south agree upon
      their common interests. The current focus of the north-south conflict over the role of existing specialized
      agencies within the process of global negotiations may help. If both sides treat this disagreement as a
      substantive debate, and therefore try to convince the other side rather than to get it to make concessions, the
      result could be agreement on a formula defining the common north-south interests that both sides want
      international institutions to serve.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Luckily, neither north nor south has anything to lose in this debate. They cannot even lose face by being
      convinced of the other's position. The north need not be worried about being convinced of the south's
      position because the south's position on the proper role of intergovernmental economic management
      institutions remains one of the few incoherent parts of the new order ideology. The south need not worry about
      being convinced by the north; the north's current position on the subject makes no more sense.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The dominant ideology holds that intergovernmental economic management institutions exist only to do things that
      no state can do by itself. On this north and south agree. Neither fully accepts the lesson Keynes taught, that
      total subjection of international institutions to the will of one or many states would make such management
      impossible. Northerners just argue that international institutions must be subject to the interests of their
      dominant member states only, while the third world demands that international institutions be subject to the will
      of all states.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      <a id="page_183"></a>North and south will disagree over what common interest international institutions should
      have some autonomous responsibility to serve. Nonetheless, both northern and southern views will change if they
      debate the issue. Those views have to change, even if only to frame coherent opposing positions. That could get
      each side into a habit of changing its views in order to facilitate resolution of the conflict. If that were to
      happen, the last pages of the history of the south's new order ideology could be written about how it changed
      through time to resolve the north-south conflict, rather than to perpetuate it.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      That has not happened yet. As I finish writing this afterword, in July 1983, north and south look as far apart as
      ever. UNCTAD VI has just ended after illustrating many of the themes in the last pages of this history of the
      NIEO ideology. The south came to UNCTAD VI with a set of proposals for "emergency" assistance to the
      third world, (<a id="bck_fn0406" href="Ch07.xhtml#fn0406">4</a>) proposals influenced by the opinions of
      their northern supporters on the Brandt Commission whose second report argued the need for such a crisis program
      even if it meant postponing global agreement on more fundamental reforms.(<a id="bck_fn0407" href="Ch07.xhtml#fn0407">5</a>) The northern states rejected even this seemingly moderate short-term proposal.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      While southern delegates to UNCTAD VI may have thought that they had moderated their views by ending their calls
      for immediate creation of the NIEO and by adopting some of the views of their northern supporters, the major
      northern nations did not see it that way. The U.S. and its closest allies argued that the south's emergency
      program was too costly and that UNCTAD did not even have the authority to discuss it since the program involved
      much more than trade matters. Those northern governments still on the far side of ul Haq's philosophical
      bridge that I discuss in <a href="Ch05.xhtml#ht0029">chapter 4</a> even denied the south's analysis
      of the current situation in the world economy. The most conservative northern states contended that while the
      economic health of the LDCs depended on that of the developed nations, the opposite was not at all true; the
      south's economic well-being was peripheral to that of the north.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The north's position at UNCTAD VI will not be its final word. Significantly, the day after the UNCTAD
      meetings ended two of the most important economic policy makers in the U.S. contradicted the analysis their
      government had been loudly defending for a month. The head of the American Council of Economic Advisors to the
      President and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve both argued that the economic health of some third world
      states, those with large debts, was indeed crucial to all developed countries.(<a id="bck_fn0408" href="Ch07.xhtml#fn0408">6</a>) That change in tune hardly means that the U.S. has accepted the significance of every
      third world country's economy or that the U.S. would be willing to conduct any substantive negotiations with
      the <a id="page_184"></a>south in forums like UNCTAD, but the new U.S. argument was, in fact, the same one the
      Brandt Commission's second report had made. That position, in turn, provides a basis for substantive
      north-south discussions of common interests.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      The south's UNCTAD VI position will not be its final word either, although I would not want to predict what
      lessons the south will draw from that meeting. Third world governments may decide that their recent strategy of
      showing more consideration for northern interests has been failure. The south may come to berate the Brandt
      Commission and other nongovernmental allies for suggesting common north-south interests that the most powerful
      northern governments failed to see. The south may move from its strategy of negotiation and from its growing
      interest in substantive debate with the north.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      If the south does move away from its recent strategy the, NIEO ideology probably will contribute nothing to the
      resolution of the north-south conflict for some time. Now, the conflict can be resolved only through substantive
      debate. Given the difference in economic power between north and south, each round of simple bargaining based on
      exchanged concessions merely replicates the existing divisions between rich and poor and the conflict inherent in
      them. The path away from substantive debate will lead to a longer history for the NIEO ideology as third world
      governments transform their views in order to deal with their continuing conflict with the north.
    </div>

    <div class="footnote">
      <h2 id="ht0051" class="item1"><a href="contents.xhtml#bck_ht0051">Notes</a></h2>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0403">
        <a href="Ch07.xhtml#bck_fn0403">(1)</a>Ernst Haas, "Words Can Hurt You; or, Who Said What to Whom
        About Regimes," <span class="underline">International Organization</span> 36 (Spring 1982): 242.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0404">
        <a href="Ch07.xhtml#bck_fn0404">(2)</a>Duncan MacRae, <span class="underline">The Social Function of
        Social Science</span> (New Haven: Yale Univ. press, 1976), pp. 277-78.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0405">
        <a href="Ch07.xhtml#bck_fn0405">T3)</a>Immanuel Wallerstein, <span class="underline">The Modern
        World-System</span> (New York: Academic Press, 1974), p. 14.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0406">
        <a href="Ch07.xhtml#bck_fn0406">(4)</a><span class="underline">New York Times</span>, July 3, 1983, p.
        1.
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0407">
        <a href="Ch07.xhtml#bck_fn0407">(5)</a> Independent Commission on International Development,
        <span class="underline">Common Crisis</span> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1983).
      </div>

      <div class="footnote_3digit" id="fn0408">
        <a href="Ch07.xhtml#bck_fn0408">(6)</a><span class="underline">New York Times</span>, July 5, 1983, p.
        1.
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
