<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>The Emergence Of The Nieo Ideology</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>
</head>
  <body class="calibre">
  <div class="calibre1">
    <div class="text_right">
      <a id="page_i"></a><a id="page_ia"></a>The Emergence of the NIEO Ideology
    </div>

    <h1 class="h1_title-text_center">Also of Interest</h1>

    <div class="text_center">
      <a><span class="italic">*</span></a><span class="italic">The Challenge of the New International Eaonomia
      Order,</span> edited by Edwin Ρ. Reubens
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <a><span class="italic">*</span></a><span class="italic">Threat to Development: Pitfalls of the NI EO,</span>
      William Loehr and John P. Powelson
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">U.S. Foreign Policy and the New International Eaonomic Order: Negotiating Global Problems,
      1974-1981,</span> Robert K. Olson
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">U.S. Foreign Policy and Multilateral Development Banks,</span> Jonathan E. Sanford
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <a><span class="italic">*</span></a><span class="italic">International Financial Cooperation: A Framework for
      Change,</span> Frances Stewart and Arjun Sengupta, edited by Salah Al-Shaikhly
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">Development Financing: A Framework for International Financial Cooperation,</span> edited by
      Salah Al-Shaikhly
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">The Lending Policy of the World Bank in the 1970s: Analysis and Evaluation,</span> Bettina
      S. Hurni
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <a><span class="italic">*</span></a><span class="italic">Debt and the Lees Developed Countries,</span> edited by
      Jonathan David Aronson
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">The Eoonomics of Foreign Aid and Self - Sustaining Development,</span> Raymond F. Mikesell
      with Robert A. Kilmarx and Arvin Kramish
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">Comparative Development Perspectives,</span> edited by Gustav Ranis, Robert L. West, Cynthia
      Taft Morris, and Mark Leiserson
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">The Challenges of South-South Cooperation,</span> edited by Breda Pavlic, Raul R. Uranga,
      Boris Cizelj, and Marjan Svetlicic
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <a><span class="italic">*</span></a><span class="italic">From Dependency to Development: Strategies to Overcome
      Underdevelopment and Ineqwality,</span> edited by Heraldo Muñoz
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">The Economies of New Technology in Developing Countries,</span> edited by Frances Stewart
      and Jeffrey James
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">Information, Economies and Power: The North-South Dimension,</span> edited by Rita Cruise
      O'Brien
    </div>

    <div class="text_center">
      <a><span class="italic">*</span></a><span class="italic">The Foreign Policy Priorities of Third World
      States,</span> edited by John J. Stremlau
    </div>

    <div class="footnote_1digit">
      <a>*</a>Available in hardcover and paperback.
    </div>

    <h1 class="h1_title-text_center">Westview Special Studies in Social, Political, and Economic Development</h1>

    <div class="text_center">
      <span class="italic">The Emergence of the NIEO Ideology</span>
      <br class="calibre1"/>
      Craig Murphy
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      This study traces the political history of the ideas underlying Third World calls for a New International
      Economic Order. Filling a significant gap in the literature, the book shows that NIEO ideology has a direct,
      unbroken line of development extending back to World War II, when a "new international economic order,"
      the Bretton Woods system, was created. Dr. Murphy maintains that NIEO ideology is not rooted only in Third World
      acceptance of Prebisch's views on trade; rather, it evolved from Third World attempts to cope with problems
      and opportunities that emerged as the Bretton Woods system was created, operated, and began to break down. By the
      1970s, the ideology had become a complex and coherent analysis of the economic position of Third World states,
      including a <span class="italic">political</span> analysis of how Third World views could be made dominant.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Many of Dr. Murphy's conclusions challenge the conventional wisdom about the Third World position of the
      NIEO. In addition, his study offers insight into the relatively unexplored area of how changes in political and
      social consciousness affect international systems, and provides grounds on which officials from both the South
      and the North can see the others' views as less alien.
    </div>

    <div class="text_indent">
      Craig Murphy is assistant professor of political science at Wellesley College. He is the author of numerous
      journal articles in <span class="italic">International Interactions, International Studies Quarterly,</span> and
      <span class="italic">The Legion Observer</span> (in Ghana).
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
